HANDBOOK FOR FERTILISER INSPECTORS

                                                 By
                                          M.ARUN
                                   DEPUTY DIRECTOR
               Manoharanarun1965@gmail.com,mobile no.9444003402

               REGIONAL FERTILISER CONTROL LABORATORY

                   MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE
                    (DEPTT.OF AGRICULTURE & FARMERS WELFARE)

                                         GOVT OF INDIA
                                             CHENNAI
2
                                                   PREFACE

         Agriculture is the key to prosperity of our country, as a major section of the population
is dependent on agriculture livelihood. One of the priorities of the Government therefore is
to provide fertiliser to the Farmer in requisite quantity at affordable prices at the right time.
Fertiliser is a costliest input for boosting agricultural production and productivity.

         The Essential Commodities Act 1955(10 of 1955) came in to operation with effect from
01.04.1955 in the entire country. The Central Government declared Fertilisers whether
inorganic,organic or mixed as essential commodities under section 2(a) (xi) of the ECA 1955
on 29.03.1957.

         The ECA 1955 provides for regulation of production,supply,distribution,pricing ,trade
and commerce for Essential Commodities in the public interestto achieve the above goal. The
Central Government promulgated Control Orders under Section 3 of the Act. The ECA has 15
Sections and provides for delegation of powers and duties to state Governments, powers of
regulating the manufacture,trade,import etc., through licensing/permits or authorization to
sell or offer of sale, stock, or distribute to the essential commodities with controlling price.
ECA 1955 prohibiting black marketing of the essential commodities, maintenance of records
and books of accounts and also the provision for search,seizure and confiscation of the
essential commodities and their receptacles. Italso provides penal provisions.

         The main motto of the ECA 1955 is to ensure the availability of right quality and
adequate quantity of fertilizers at right time and at affordable price to the farmers in all parts
of the country. The Central Government promulgated the following orders in exercise of the
powers conferred under Section 3 of the E.C.A. to regulate manufacture, quality, sale,
distribution, price, and movement etc. of fertilizers:

         G.S.R. 758 (E). Initially, the F.C.O. was issued on 23.04.1957 and came into force w.e.f.
15.05.1957. Since.Then a lot of changes in fertilizer technology, production and distribution
system took place. A number of new products, like bio fertiliser,organic fertiliser,customised
fertiliser,micronutrients, etc., also came into the market. A need was also felt to make the
provisions of the F.C.O. more stringent and up to date so that the fertilizer quality control
machinery is more effective. This led to several amendments in the FCO, 1957. Subsequently,
an overall review of the FCO, 1957 was conducted by the `FCO Review Committee' set up by
the Central Government. Finally, the revised FCO called FCO1985 was issued on 25.09.1985
which came into force with immediate effect. In 2003 made several amendments in FCO like
the Dealer registration (License system) abolished and introduced memorandum of
intimation and Letter of Authorization. Introduced REFEREE Analysis, Qualification for
Fertiliser Retail Dealer has been amended and compulsory training for Fertiliser Inspector for
every three years is also made under FCO during 2018.

         The main objective of the FCO is to protect the interest of the farmers as well as that
of genuine traders/manufacturers from the exploitation by unscrupulous elements. These are

                                                             3
achieved by ensuring the availability of fertilizers of right quality and at right time by
regulating their quality, price, distribution, sale, etc., the enforcement of FCO is entrusted to
the State Government who has been vested with adequate powers in this regard. Till
November 2023, specification of 152Inorganic fertilisers including 100% Water soluble
complex fertilisers. 11 Bio fertilisers, 10 Organicfertilisers and1Non edible de-oiled cake
fertilizers in 14 groups have been laid down in the FCO. Besides, a number of grades of
provisional and customized fertilisers are notified by the Central Government time to time
valid for three years. TheNano fertlisers also notified by the Central Government. The validity
period is three years . The Bio stimulants are also notified by the Central Government. As per
the S.O. 2900 (E) dtd 24.10.2015 a number of NPK 100% WS mixture of fertilisers also allowed
to be sold as per the General Specification of 100% WS mixture of fertilisers and the number
of grades of mixture of fertilizers have been notified by the State Governments .The sale of
fertilizers not confirming to the prescribed standards such as non-standard, adulterated,
spurious, fake etc., has been prohibited and made punishable offence under the ECA Act.

         This handbook consist of Essential Commodities Act 1955, Fertiliser (Inorganic,Organic
or Mixed)(Control) Order 1985,Fertiliser (Movement Control) Order 1973, and some of the
related and important Sections from Criminal Procedure Code 1973& Indian Penal Code 1860.
It includes various model of execute order formats which are veryhelpful to the enforcement
officers.

         Every enforcement officers must know the ECA 1955 unless can't execute your powers
in the right way. Under the FCO 1985 the Enforcement Authorities can exercise the powers
only in the administrative level but with regards to legal aspect asper ECA 1955.

         I hope this handbook is prepared very simple and easy languagealmost covered all the
needful information to the enforcement officers.The author welcomes any suggestion or
comment of the handbook so as to improve in future edition.

                                                                                                        M.Arun
                                                                                                         Author

                      ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT 1955 (10 of 1955)
                            AND ITS APPLICATION TO FERTILISERS

         The Essential Commodities Act (ECA) was enacted with the sole objective of regulating
production, supply, distribution, Trade and Commerce of Essential Commodities for its
equitable distribution in the country in the public interest.

                                                             4
         The Essential Commodities Act 1955 (10 of 1955) (ECA 1955) was came into force
w.e.f. 1.4.1955 in the entire country. The Central Government declared

         " Fertilisers " whether organic, inorganic or mixed as essential commodity under
Section 2 (a) (xi) of the ECA, vide notification SRO 1048 dated 29.03.1957.

1.Objectives& Scope

         The ECA 1955 provides for regulation of production, supply, distribution, pricing trade
and commerce of Essential Commodities in the public interest. The Union Government has
been vested with powers to issue control orders under Section 3 of the Act for achieving of
objectives of any essential commodity.

         The ECA 1955 has 15 Sections and provides for delegation of powers and duties to
State Governments, powers for regulating the manufacturers, trade, etc., through licensing /
permits / authorization, controlling prices, prohibiting black marketing / boarding of the
essential commodities, maintenance of records and books of accounts, and also the provision
for search, seizure and confiscation of commodities and their receptacles.

Section -1: Short title and extent

Section ­ 2: Definitions

Section ­ 2A Essential commodities declaration, etc

(1) For the purpose of this Act "essential commodity" means commodity specified in the
     Schedule.

(2) (a) add a commodity to the said schedule
     (b) Remove any commodity from the said schedule
     In consultation with the state Government

ESSENTIAL COMMODITIES

  (1) Drugs
  Explanation ­ For the purposes of this Schedule "drugs" has the meaning assigned to it in

       clause (b) of section 3 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,1940(23 0f 1940)
  (2) Fertilizer, whether inorganic, organic or mixed;
  (3) Foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils;
  (4) Hank yarn made wholly from cotton;
  (5) Petroleum and petroleum products;
  (6) Raw jute and jute textiles;
  (7) (i) Seeds of food-crops and seeds of fruits and vegetables;

       (ii) Seeds of cattle fodder;and
       (iii) Jute seeds.

                                                             5
Section ­3:

Powers to control production, supply, distribution etc. of Essential Commodities;-

(i) This Section confers powers as the Central Government for making orders rules for
   regulating or prohibiting the production, supply and distribution, trade and commerce of
   any essential commodity. Under this Section, the Central Government issues regulatory
   orders to achieve these objectives in respect of various essential commodities. The FCO &
   FMCO has also been issued under these provisions by the Central Government.

(ii) Section 3 (2) (a):

Regulating production or manufacture by licences /permits.

         The Central Government may provide for the production and distribution of an
Essential Commodity through licenses and permits. The powers of this Section are utilized for
prescribing the various regulatory provisions under FCO for the production and trading of
fertilisers as well as fertiliser mixtures.

(iii) Section 3 (3):Controlling of Prices:

Under this Act the Central Government empowers to fix the prices of any Essential
Commodity for general public or for specific area / consumer. Accordingly the FCO provides
for fixing Maximum Retail Price of fertilisers by the Central Government under Clause 3.

iv)Section 3 (2) (d) and (f) :

Regulating storage, transport and distribution, etc.,of Essential Commodity

         The Central Government is empowered to regulate storage, transport, disposal etc.,
of an essential commodity through license / permit / authorisation. Under this powers, FCO
provides for storage and distribution of fertilisers through a system called as Authorisation
Letter to wholesale and retail dealers. The distribution is also made effective through ECA,
Supply Plan and FMCO. This power is also exercisable by the State Governments under the
provisions of FCO 1985.

(v) Section 3 (2) (e):

Prohibiting the with holding of stocks for sale:

         The Act provides for creating necessary mechanism to curb the withholding of an
essential commodity in order to increase its supply and availability. This includes provisions
for prescribing various types of stock registers and its monitoring through the periodical
reports.

         Under this Section, the provisions of FCO Clause 4 & 5 mention about maintenance of
stock registers in a specified format (Form-N), issue of cash / credit memo (Form-M) to the
purchasers and also other periodical returns under Clause 35.

(vi) Section 3 (2) (h) & (i):
                                                             6
Collection of Information and Maintenance of Book of Accounts or Records:
         Under this Section 3 (2)(h) provides for effective machinery to ensure the compliance

of the orders issued in respect of regulating / prohibiting an Essential Commodity, while the
Sub Section 2 (i) provides for maintenance of the specified records and books of accounts and
its production to the specified authority for its inspection.

         Accordingly, FCO Clause 35 provides for maintenance of records while the terms and
conditions of the Dealer Registration Certificate / Authorisation, puts for the conditions of
effective enforcement of the assigned objectives. The Clause 28 of FCO also empowers the
Fertiliser Inspectors for inspection of the various records and books of accounts.
(vii) Section 3 (2) (i)
Entry, Search and Seizure:

         Under the Act, authorized person has the power to enter, search and seize any
premises, air craft, vessels or other conveyances including animal. Which he has reason to
believe that a contravention to any order issued under ECA has been, is being or about to be
committed. He is also empowered to seize any relevant books of accounts and records, which
may be useful for any proceedings under this Act.

         Accordingly, such powers have been given to Fertiliser Inspector under Clause 28 of
FCO 1985 and Clause 4 of FMCO.
(viii) Section 4 & 5:

Imposition of duties on State Government and Delegation of Powers;
         Under Section 3 of ECA may confer the powers and duties upon the Central

Government or State Government or officers and authorities of said Government. Central
Government is also empowered to delegate powers to such officer or authority subordinate
to Central Government or State Government through official notifications.

         Accordingly under FCO duties have been assigned to Fertiliser Inspectors / Notified
Authorities / Registering Authorities and Appellate Authority. Under Clause 35 powers have
been delegated to Director of Agriculture of State Government with regard to maintenance
of records and submission of returns.

ix.Section 6A to 6E:
Confiscation of Essential Commodity;

         The ECA provides that when any essential commodity, packages, receptacles and
conveyance is seized in pursuance of the order issued there under, the authorised person
shall inform to the Collector in writing without unreasonable delay (Section 6A)

                                                             7
         Accordingly,under FCO and FMCO, the Fertiliser Inspector are empowered to seize
fertilisers, packages, etc., and required to give intimation to Collector.

         Thereafter the Collector shall pass order for custody and disposal and confiscate or
otherwise, after satisfying himself of alleged contravention. However before making an order
for confiscation, there is a provision of issuing show cause notice informing him of grounds
on which confiscation is proposed and giving an opportunity of making representation in
writing within reasonable time and also giving an opportunity of being heard in the matter
(Section 6B), there is also a provision for appeal to the State Government by aggrieved
persons against the confiscation order, within one month from the date of communication of
said orders (Section 6C).

(x). Section 7, 9, 10B and 12AA (f):

     Penalties:-

         All offences under Act if tried in a summary, and the accused can be convicted for a
maximum term of 2 year (Section 12 AA(f). However, Section 7 of ECA prescribes the question
of imprisonment up to 7 years with or without fine. When the case is tried in a regular trial,
the court can impose a sentence up to 7 years under Section 7.

The gist of penalties for violation or order under Section 3 of Act is as under:-

         1. In case of summary trial ­ Imprisonment up to terms of 2 years.

         2. In case of Regular Trial

 (i) For non-furnishing of information and non-maintaining or production of books of
        accounts and record:

First offence        Imprisonment up to 1 year with or without fine Section 7(I) (a) (i)

Subsequent offence   As per first offence with direction not to carrry on any or without
                     fine Section 7(I)(a)(i)

-Subsequent offence  As per first offence with direction not to carry on any business in
                     that commodity of a minimum period of 6 months (section 7
                     (3)).

(i) For making false statement / document etc.: Imprisonment for a term up to 5 years
         with or without fine (Section 9(ii)).

(ii) For other offences

                     8
First offence Imprisonment up to 6 months to 7 years with or without fine Section 7(I)
                  (a) (ii)

Subsequent Imprisonment from 6 months to 7 years with or without fine. In addition

offence  he may be debarred from business for minimum 6 months (Section 7 (2A).

     (iii) To forfeit to the Government, the goods of which the contravention is done and
              also the packing, animal, vehicle etc. used in carrying the property (Section 7
              (I)(b&c)).

     (iv) The name, place of business of the company (convicted under the Act) alongwith
              nature of contravention, and the fact that the company has been so convicted and
              any other such particulars, may be published in the newspaper at the cost of the
              company, as if it was a fine. Publishing of news shall be make effective only after
              the period for preferring the appeal against order has expired or the appeal has
              been disposed off (Section 10 (B).

(xi). Section 8 to 12:

     Cognizance of offence and prosecution of offenders:-

         Any person who attempt or abets a contravention of any order under Section 3 of Act
shall be deemed to have contravened that order and shall be kept at part with person who
actually violated the order (section 8).

         Mens-rea (Motive, intent) is an essential ingredient of an offence under the Act. The
Court shall presume the existence of mens-rea i.e. the culpable mental state and it shall be
defence for the accused to prove the fact he had not such mental state with respect to the
alleged charges in the prosecution (section 10C) Culpable mental state includes intention,
motive knowledge of a fact and belief in or reason to believe a fact.

         Making any statement or furnish information which is false, when required by; any
order Section 3 is punishable (section 9). However, bonafide error in record about sale and
distribution, etc .is not punishable because, there must be guilty mind as an essential
ingredient of offence.

         For the purpose of prosecuting company, the term company used under Section 10,
means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals.

         Section 10, lays down the rational of fixing responsibility in the matter of violation of
the Act by the company. According to this, the person incharge at the time of commission of
offence and the person responsible to the company for the conduct of business be prosecuted
for contravention alongwith the company. A Director, Manager, Secretary, Partner or any
other officer of the company become liable for such contravention unless he can satisfy the
court that he had no knowledge of contravention or that he exercise all due diligence to
prevent such contravention.

         9
         In case of offences by a fertiliser company, an officer nominated validly by the
Company under Clause 24 of FCO, 1985, would be liable to be prosecuted to represent the
company.

(xii). Section 12 A: POWER TO TRY SUMMARILY
         If the Central Government is of opinion that a situation has arisen where,in the

interest of production,supply or distribution of any essential commodity not being an
essential commodity referred to in Clause (a) of sub-section (2) or trade or commerce therein
and other relevant considerations, it is necessary that the contravention of any order made
under section 3 in relation to such essential commodity should be tried summarily.
(xiii) Section 12B: Grant of Injunction, etc., by civil courts

         Section 12B of ECA makes it mandatory of prior notice by civil courts to the Central /
State Government or public officer before granting any injunction in respect of any act done
or purporting to be done by such Government or such officer in charge of his official capacity
under ECA or any order make thereunder.

(xiv). Section 13:
     Presumption as to order:-
         Where an order purports to have been made and signed by an authority the exercise

of any power conferred by or under this Act, a Court shall presume that such order was so
made by that authority within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 (1 of 1872).

(xv). Section 14:
     Burden of proof:-
         When a person is prosecuted for contravention of any order under Section-3, the

burden of proof lies on accused to establish that he has authority, permit, licence or other
documents for any action or possession of prohibited goods.

(xvi). Section 15:
     Protection of Action under ECA:-
         Section 15 of ECA provides protection and barred any prosecution, proceedings or any

suit against a person for anything done or intended to be done, in good faith, in pursuance of
the Act. Similarly, protection is also granted to the Government for any act done or intended
to be done in good faith and this, not suit or other legal proceeding shall be lie against
Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused by such action.
(xvii). Section 15A :

         Prosecution of Public Servant:-

                                                            10
         Previous sanction of central / State is required for prosecution of any public servant
for any offence, alleged to have been committed by him while discharging his duties or in
pursuance of an order (Section 15A).

               FERTILISER (Inorganic, Organic or Mixed) (CONTROL) ORDER, 1985
FCO consists of 39 Clauses and can be divided mainly into following chapters:-

        1. Short tiles and commencement (Cl. 1)
        2. Definitions (Cl. 2)
        3. Price Control (Cl. 3-5)

        4. Control on distribution of fertilizers by manufacturers / importers (Cl. 6)
        5. Authorisation or registration for dealers (Cl. 7 ­ 11)
        6. Manufacture of Mixture of Fertilisers, organic fertilizers, bio-fertilisers and Non

            edible de-oiled cake (Cl. 12-18)
        7. Restriction on manufacture, import, sale etc., of fertilizers (Cl. 19-25)
        8. Enforcement Authorities (Cl. 26 ­ 28)

        9. Analysis of fertilizer samples and time limits (Cl 29-30)
        10. Miscellaneous (Cl. 31-39)

                                  The details of Clauses are as under:-
Clause ­ 1:- Short title and commencement
This order may be called as the Fertiliser(Inorganic,Organic or Mixed) (Control) Order, 1985

Clause- 2 :- Definitions
         This clause deals with the definition of various terms used in the FCO, 1985. Some of

the important definitions is given below:-
         Biostimulant means a substance or micro organism or a combination of both whose

primary function when applied to plants, seeds or rhizosphere is to stimulate physiological
processes in plants and to enhance its nutrient uptake, growth, yield, nutrition efficiency, crop
quality and tolerance to stress, regardless of its nutrient content. But does not include
pesticides or plant growth regulators which are regulated under the Insecticides Act 1968.
Fertilisers:

         Fertiliser means any essential substance,either in straight or mixed form and derived
from either inorganic,organic or mixed sources, that is used or intended to be used to provide
essential plant nutrients or beneficial elements or both for the soil or for the crop or makes
essential plants nutrients available to the plants either directly or by biological process or by
both in the soil or plant as notified from time to time by the Central Government and specified

                                                            11
in the schedule appended to this order or as may be notified by the State Governments.And
includes a biostimulant and nano fertilizer.
Grade:

         The nutrient content in fertilizer, expressed in percentage.
Granulated mixture

         Granulated mixture" means a mixture of fertilisers made by intimately mixing two or
more fertilisers with or without inert material, and granulating them together, without
involving any chemical reaction.
Mixture of Fertilisers

         Mixture of fertilisers" means a mixture of fertllisers made by physical mixing two or
more fertilisers with or without inert material in physical or granular form and includes a
mixture of NPK fertilisers, a mixture of micronutrient fertilisers and a mixture of NPK with
micronutrient fertilizers.
physical mixture

         physical mixture" means a mixture of fertilisers made by physically mixing two or more
fertilisers with or without inert material necessary to make a required grade, without
involving any chemical reaction;
Non-edible de-oiled cake fertiliser

         Non-edible de-oiled cake fertiliser" means substance obtained as residue after oil
extraction (by expeller and/or through solvent extraction) from crushed seeds of non-edible
oilseeds (such as Castor, Neem) for use in soil as fertiliser.
Organic fertilizer

         Organic fertilizer" means substances made up of one or more unprocessed material
(s) of a biological nature (plant/animal) and may include unprocessed mineral materials that
have been altered through microbiological decomposition process;
Offer for sale

         Offer for sale" includes a reference to an intimation by a person of a proposal by him
for the sale of any fertiliser, made by publication of a price list, by exposing the fertilizer for
sale indicating the price, by furnishing of a quotation or otherwise howsoever

Importer:
         A person who imports fertilizer (decanalise) as per the export import Policy of Central

Government.
                                                            12
Pool Handling Agency:
         An agency entrusted by Central Government with functions relating to handling and

distribution of imported fertilizer (canalized fertilizer).
Dealer:

         A person carrying on the business of selling fertilisers whether whole sale or retail or
industrial use and includes a manufacturer,importer and pool handling agency,marketer
carrying on such business and the agents of such person,manufacturer,importer or pool
handling agency.
Retail Dealer:

         A dealer who sells fertilizers to the farmers or plantations for agricultural use such as
for fertilization of soil and increasing productivity of crops.
Wholesale Dealers- A dealer who sells fertilizers, otherwise than in retail, for agricultural use
such as for fertilization of soil and increasing productivity of crops.
Industrial Dealer - A dealer who sells fertilizers for industrial purposes i.e., for purposes other
than fertilization of soil and increasing productivity of crops.
Marketer ­ Any fertiliser companies who sell. Offer forsale, carry on the business of selling of
fertiliser manufactured by other fertiliser company.
Registering Authority - An authority appointed under Clause 26 in respect of mixture of
fertilizers and special mixture of fertilizers.
Notified Authority - An authority appointed under Clause 26A by State Government for
authorization of wholesale and retail sale of fertilizers for agricultural purposes.

                                     II PRICE CONTROL

Clause-3 :Fixation of Price of Fertilisers
         At present the MRP of most of the fertilizers are fixed by the manufacture or importer

and subsidy fixed by the Government from 1st April every year. No dealer, manufacturer,
importer or Pool Handling Agency shall sell or offer for sale any fertilizers at a price exceeding
the maximum price or rate so fixed. . The retail dealers are required to display the rates of
the fertilizers.
Clause-4:Display of stock position and price list of fertilisers

         Every dealer, who makes or offers to make a retail sale of any fertilisers, shall
prominently display in his place of business:-

     (a) the quantities of opening stock of different fertilisers held by him on each day;

                                                            13
Explanation -The actual stocks at any point of time during the day may be different from that
of the displayed opening stocks to the extent of sale and receipt of such fertilisers up to the
time of inspection during that day

     (b) A list of prices or rates of such fertilisers fixed under clause 3 and for the time being
          in force.

Clause -5 : Issue of Cash / Credit Memorandum

         Every dealer shall issue a cash or credit memorandum to the purchaser of a fertilizer
in Form M.

       III CONTROL ON DISTRIBUTION OF FERTILISER BY MANUFACTURER/IMPORTER

Clause -6: Allocation of Fertilisers to Various States

         The Central Government is empowered to direct the manufacturers / importers,
through notifications of Official Gazette, to see the specified quality of fertilizer produced by
him in the specified states and within specified period. Presently Urea is only covered under
ECA allocation. This allocation is also limited to 50% of plant capacity. Allocation issued Bi
annually by the ministry.

                 IV AUTHORISATION OR REGISTRATION OF DEALER

Clause -7: Registration of Industrial dealers and authorization of other dealers

         No person shall sell, offer for sale or carry on the business of selling of fertilizer at any
place as wholesale dealer or retail dealer except under and in accordance with clause8;

         Provided that a State Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient, by
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt from the provisions of this clause any person
selling fertilizer to farmers in such areas and subject to such conditions as may be specified in
that notification.

Clause -8:Application for intimation or registration

   1.Every person intending to sell or offer for sale or carrying on the business of selling of
       fertilizer as Industrial Dealer shall obtain a certificate of registration from the controller
       by making an application in Form A together with the fee prescribed under clause 36
       and a Certificate of source in Form O.

   2. Every person including a manufacturer, an importer, a pool handling agency, wholesaler
       and a retail dealer intending to sell or offer for sale or carrying on the business of selling
       of fertilizer shall make a Memorandum of Intimation to the Notified Authority, in Form
       A1 duly filled in, in duplicate, together with the fee prescribed under clause 36 and
       certificate of source in Form O.

   3. On receipt of a Memorandum of Intimation, complete in all respects, the Notified
       Authority shall issue an acknowledgement of receipt in Form A2 and it shall be deemed

                                                            14
       to be an authorization letter granted and the concerned person as authorised dealer for
       the purposes of this Order.

         Provided that where the applicant is a State Government, a manufacturer or an
importer or a pool- handling agency, it shall not be necessary to submit Form O.

         Provided also that a separate Memorandum of Intimation shall be submitted by an
applicant for whole sale business or retail dealership, as the case may be:

         Provided also that where fertilizers are obtained for sale from different sources, a
certificate of source from each such source shall be furnished in Form O."

         Provided also that where the manufacturer of organic fertilizer is a State Government
or municipality, it shall not be necessary for it to obtain the authorisation letter:

         Provided also that where the manufacturer of vermicompost, other than a State
Government or municipality, has annual production capacity less than 50 metric tonnes, it
shall not be necessary for him to obtain the authorisation letter.

   4. No authorization letter shall be granted to any application for retail dealership, unless
       the applicant possess the certificate course of fifteen days from state agriculture
       University or Krishi Vigyan Kendras or National Institute of agricultural Extension
       Management (MANAGE) or National Institute of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj
       (NIDPR) or Fertiliser Association of India or any other approved Government institute.
         Provided that a person in possession of Bachelor of Science in Agriculture or Chemistry

or Diploma in agriculture Science from a recognized University or Institute or equivalent
course having one of the subject on fertiliser or agri inputs as notified by the state
Government shall not be required to possess separate certificate.

         Provided further that a dealer who has been granted authorization letter before
commencement of the Fertiliser (Inorganic,Organic or Mixed) (Control) Fourth Amendment
Order,2018 shall not require to possess the qualification at the time of renewal of their
authorization letter.

         Provided also that the said qualification shall not be applicable for renewal of the
authorization letter of the registered agricultural co-operative societies and state marketing
federations subject to condition that such society or federation shall engage a person who
possesses the qualification under this clause.

Clause-9: Grant or refusal of Certificate of Registration
         The Controller, shall grant a certificate of registration in Form 'B' within thirty days of

the receipt of application to any person who applies for it under clause 8;

                                                            15
Provided that no certificate of registration shall be granted to a person: -

 (a) If his previous certificate of registration is under suspension

 (b) If his previous certificate of registration has been cancelled within a period of one year
       immediately preceding the date of application

 (c) If he has been convicted of an offence under the Act, or any Order made there under
       within three years immediately preceding the date of making the application

 (d) If he fails to enclose with the application a certificate of source

 (e) If the application is incomplete in any respect

 (f) If he makes an application for obtaining the certificate of registration for industrial dealer
       and, excepting if he is a manufacturer , importer or pool handling agency, holds [an
       authorization letter] for wholesale dealer or retail dealer or both, and as the case may
       be, the vice-versa.

Clause-10: Period of validity of certificate of registration and letter of authorization

         Every certificate of registration granted under clause 9 and every authorization letter
issued under clause 8 shall, unless renewed, suspended or cancelled, be valid for a period of
five years from the date of its issue.

The letter of authorization granted to the manufacture of city compost issued under clause 8,
unless suspended or cancelled is valid in perpetuity.

Clause-11: Renewal of certificates of registration and authorization letters

  1. Every holder of a certificate of registration granted under clause 9 or authorization
       letter granted or deemed to have been granted under clause 8, desiring to renew such
       certificate or authorization letter shall, before the date of expiry of such certificate of
       registration or authorization letter, as the case may be, make an application for renewal
       to the Controller, in Form C, or to the Notified Authority in Form A1, respectively, in
       duplicate, together with the fee prescribed under clause 36 for such renewal and a
       certificate of source as required under clause 8.

  2. On receipt of an application under sub-clause (1), together with such fee and certificate
       of source, the controller may renew the certificate of registration or the Notified
       Authority, as the case may be shall issue acknowledgement receipt of renewal in form
       A 2.

       Provided that a certificate of registration shall not be renewed if the holder of the same
       did not sell any fertiliser during the period of one year immediately preceding the date
       of expiry of the period of validity.

  3. If any application for renewal is not made before the expiry of the period of validity of
       the certificate of registration or, as the case may be, the authorization letter but is made
       within one month from the date of such expiry, the certificate of registration or, as the
                                                            16
       case may be, the authorization letter shall be dealt as provided in sub-clause (2) on
       payment of such additional fee as may be prescribed under clause 36 in addition to the
       fee for renewal.
  4. Where the application for renewal of certificate of registration is made within the time
       specified in sub- clause (1) or sub-clause (3), the applicant shall be deemed to have held
       a valid certificate of registration until such date as the controller passes orders on the
       application for renewal.
  5. If an application for renewal of a certificate of registration or authorization letter is not
       made within one month from the date of expiry of their period of validity, the same
       shall be deemed to have lapsed on the date on which its validity expired and any
       business carried on after that date shall be deemed to have been carried on in
       contravention of clause 7.

                   V MANUFACTURE OF MIXTURE OF FERTILISERS

Clause ­ 12: Restriction on Preparation of Mixture of fertiliser

No person shall carry on the business of preparing any mixture of fertilizer, special mixture of
fertilizer except under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a Certificate of
Manufacture (CM) granted to him under Clause 15 or 16

Clause-13: Standards of mixtures of Fertilisers

         (a) No person shall manufacture any mixture of fertilisers whether of solid or liquid
             fertilizers specified in Part A of schedule I unless such mixture conforms to the
             standards set out in the notification to be issued by the Central Government in the
             Official Gazette;

         (b) No person shall manufacture any Biofertiliser unless such Biofertiliser conforms to
             the standards set out in the part A of Schedule ­ III.

         (c)No person shall manufacture any Organic fertilizer unless such organic fertilizer
         conforms to the standards set out in the part A of Schedule IV.

    2. Subject to the other provisions of this order, no person shall manufacture any
         "mixture of fertilisers unless such mixture conforms to the standards set out in the
         notification to be issued by the State Government in the Official Gazette;

Explanation- For the purposes of this sub-clause, mixture of fertilizers shall not include liquid
fertilizers and 100% Water soluble complex fertilizers.

    3. No Certificate of manufacture shall be granted in respect of any fertiliser which does
         not conform to the standards set out in the notification.

    4. Nothing in this clause shall apply to special mixtures of fertilisers

Clause-14: Application for certificate of manufacture of mixtures of fertillsers

                                                            17
         1. Every person desiring to obtain a certificate of manufacture for preparation of any
             mixture of fertilisers or special mixture of fertilisers shall possess such qualification
             as may be prescribed for this purpose by the State Government or shall employ a
             person possessing such qualifications for the preparation of such mixtures, and
             possess the minimum laboratory facility as specified in clause 21 A of this Order.

         2. An applicant for a certificate of manufacture for preparation of mixture of
             fertilisers or special mixture of fertilisers shall make an application to the
             registering authority.

         a. If he is an application for a Certificate of Manufacturer for any mixture of fertilisers
             in Form D, in duplicate, together with the fee prescribed there for under clause36
             or

         b. If he is an applicant for a certificate of manufacture for any special mixture, in Form
             D, in duplicate, together with the fee prescribed there for under the said clause 36
             and an attested copy of the requisition of the purchaser.

Clause-15: Grant or refusal of certificate of manufacture for preparation of mixtures of
              fertilizers

         1. On receipt of an application under clause 14, the registering authority shall, by
             order in writing, either grant or refuse to grant the certificate of manufacture in
             respect of any mixture of fertilizer or special mixture of fertilizer and shall, within
             forty-five days from the date of receipt of the application, furnish to the applicant
             a copy of the order so passed;

         2. Where an application for a certificate of manufacture for mixture of fertilizers is
             not refused, the registering authority shall grant a certificate of manufacture in
             Form F and where an application for a certificate of manufacture for a special
             mixture is not refused such authority shall within forty five dates from the date of
             receipt of the application, grant a certificate of manufacture to the applicant in
             Form F.

Clause-16: Conditions for grant of certificate of manufacture in respect of special mixture
              of fertilisers and period of validity of such certificate

         1. No certificate of manufacture in respect of any special mixture of fertilisers shall
             be granted to an applicant unless he holds a valid certificate of manufacture under
             this Order for any mixture of fertilisers.

         2. Every certificate of manufacture granted in respect of any special mixture of
             fertilisers shall be valid for a period of six months from the date of its issue;

Provided that the registering authority may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, extend
the said period to such further period or periods as it may deem fit, so however, that the total
period or periods so extended shall not exceed twelve months.

                                                            18
Clause 17: Period of validity of a Certificate of Manufacture for preparation of Mixtures of
              Fertilizers.

Every certificate of manufacture granted under clause 15 for preparation of a mixture of
fertilizers, unless suspended or cancelled, is valid for a period of three years from the date of
issue.

Clause 18 Renewal of certificate of manufacture for preparation of mixtures of fertilizers.

         1. Every holder of a certificate of manufacture for preparation of a mixture of
             fertilizers, renew the certificate before the date of expiry of the said certificate of
             manufacture make an application to the registering authority in Form D in
             duplicate, together with the prescribed fees.

         2. On receipt of an application for renewal and keeping in view the performance of
             the applicant and other relevant circumstances, the registering authority may
             renew the certificate of manufacture by endorsement on Form F and in case the
             certificate of registration is not renewed, the registering authority shall record in
             writing his reasons for not renewing the certificate of manufacture.

         3. If an application for renewal is not made before the expiry of the certificate of
             manufacture but is made within one month from the date of expiry of the
             certificate of manufacture, may be renewed on payment of such additional fee
             prescribed by the State Government.

         4. Where the application for renewal is made within the time, the applicant shall be
             deemed to have held a valid certificate of manufacture until such date as the
             registering authority passes order on the application for renewal.

         5. If an application for renewal of a certificate of manufacture is not made within the
             stipulated period, the certificate of manufacture shall be deemed to have expired
             immediately on the expiry of its validity period, and any business carried on or
             after that date shall be deemed to have been contravention of clause 12.

     VI RESTRICTION ON MANUFACTURE/IMPORT,SALE,ETC,OF FERTILSER

    Clause 19: Restriction on Manufacture / Import, Sale and Distribution of Fertiliser

    1. No person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufacture / import
         for sale, offer for sale, stock or exhibit for sale or distribute any fertilizer which is not
         of prescribed standard.

    2. Manufacture/Import for sale, sell, offer for sale, stock or exhibit for sale, or distribute
         any mixture of fertilisers, which is not of prescribed standard or special mixture of
         fertilisers which does not conform to the particulars specified In the certificate of
         manufacture granted to him under this Order in respect of such special mixture.

    3. Any fertiliser the container whereof is not packed and marked in the manner laid down
         In this Order

                                                            19
    4. Any fertiliser which is an imitation of or a substitute for another fertiliser under the
         name of which it is sold

    5. Any fertilizer which is adulterated

Explanation:-

         A fertiliser added any non fertiliser substance and the addition of which is likely to
eliminate or decrease its nutrient contents or make the fertiliser not conforming to the
prescribed standard is called adulterated fertilisers.

    6. Any fertiliser the label or container whereof bears the name of any individual firm or
         company purporting to be manufacturer/Importer of the fertiliser, which individual,
         firm or company Is fictitious or does not exist. Any fertiliser the label or container
         whereof or anythingaccompanying therewith bears any statement which makes a
         false claim for the fertiliser of which is false or misleading in any material particular.

    7. Any substance as a fertiliser which substance is not, in fact, a fertiliser
    8. Any fertilizer without exhibiting the minimum guaranteed percentage by weight of

         plant nutrient.

Clause ­20: Specification in Respect of Imported Fertiliser

         The Central Government by an order, published in the Official Gazette, issue separate
specifications in respect of imported fertilizers.

Clause ­ 20A: specifications in respect of provisional Fertilisers

         The Central Government may notify specification of provisional fertilizers which will
be valid for a period not exceeding 3 years in respect of fertilizers to be manufactured by any
manufacturing company for conducting commercial trials.

Clause ­ 20B: Specification in Respect of customized fertilisers

         The Central Govt. may notify specification valid for a period not exceeding 3 years in
respect of customized fertilizers to be manufactured by any manufacturing company whose
annual production of fertiliser other than customized fertilisers is 5.00 lakh metric tonne.

         Customised fertiliser is a granulated multi nutrient carrier which contains primary,
Secondary and/or Micro nutrient, both from inorganic and /or organic sources, manufactured
through a systematic process of Fusion blend granulation, formulated on the basis of soil
fertility data and include 100% water soluble speciality fertiliser as customized combination
products. The Customised fertilisers are area specified and crop oriented.

Clause ­ 20C : Specification in respect of Bio-stimulant

         The specification of bio-stimulants including its name active ingredients or where it is
not possible to indicate its active ingredients, then its chemical composition, name of the crop
to which it may be applied, its benefit and the method of analysis for determination of active

                                                            20
ingredients or chemical composition shall be specified by the Central Government in Schedule
VI.

The bio-stimulants specified in Schedule VI shall be classified under any of the following
categories, namely :

    1. Botanical extract, including seaweed extracts
    2. Bio- chemicals
    3. Protein hydrolysates and amino acids
    4. Vitamins
    5. Cell free microbial products
    6. Antioxidants
    7. Anti-transpirants
    8. Humic and Fulvic Acid and their derivatives.

Clause-20D: Nano Fertilisers

  1. Notwithstanding anything contained in this order, the Central Government may, by
       order published in the Official Gazette, notify specifications, valid for a period not
       exceeding three years, conforming to the general specifications as specified in Schedule
       VII, in respect of nano fertilisers to be manufactured by such manufacturing unit, as may
       be specified therein.

  2. No person shall manufacture any nano fertilizer unless such fertilizer conforms to the
       standard set out in the order issued under sub-clause (1)

  3. Every person, desirous of obtaining approval of any nano fertilizer shall make an
       application in Form-G-4 in duplicate o the Controller alongwith a report of the State
       Agriculture University or of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research on multi-
       locational and multi crop bio-efficacy trial of minimum one season and also a report
       from any of the NABL accredited laboratories on biosafety, biotoxicity and quality trial
       as per the guidelines issued by the Department of Bio-Technology.

  4. Every manufactuer shall inform the Central Government and the Director (Agriculture)
       of the concerned State Government as to where it intends to make said fertilizer
       available to the farmers.

  5. Every manufacturer shall ensure training to farmers on the safety aspects of the use of
       nano fertilisers.

  6. Every manufacturer shall print necessary precautions on the label of the container of
       the nano fertilizer or on a separate leaflet to be packed with the nano fertilizer or on a
       separate leaflet to be packed with the nano fertilizer.

  7. Every manufacturer shall provide to the Central Government a test report of each batch
       from any of the NABL accredited Laboratories before its distribution or dispatch of nano
       fertilizer.

  8. Every manufacture shall print the batch number on the container or shall have the label
       securely affixed on the container having weight less than 5 litre.
                                                            21
Clause-21: Manufacturers/Importers and Pool Handling Agencies to Comply with Certain
Requirements in Regard to Packing and Marking

        All manufacturers / importers and pool handling agencies have to comply with certain
requirements in regard to packing and marking, etc. Some of the requirements are as follows:-

  i) Every container in which any fertilizer is packed shall be conspicuously superscripted
        the word "FERTILISER".

  ii) On the container of the imported fertilizers, where a manufacturer is also a pool
        handling agency or an importer, the word `P' or `I' as the case may be, shall be written
        against the name of the manufacturer.

  iii) The word `Imported' is to be superscripted along with the name of fertilizer on the
        container of imported stock.

  iv) The guaranteed percent of nutrients as per specification has to be printed on the
        container of fertilizers.

  v) Printing of batch number has been made compulsory on the containers of SSP,
        Micronutrient and mixtures of fertilizers.

  vi) It is also compulsory to print the "Maximum Retail Price" inclusive of all taxes / levies
        and Subsidy per bag paid by the Government of India on the bag / Container of
        fertilizer.

  vii) Every fertiliser bag is packed for sale should be packed such weight and size as per
        order issue by the Central government from time to time. The latest amendment vide
        S.O 909 (E) dated 01.03.2018 the Urea and Zincated Urea in 45 Kg.

    a) On Container of straight Fertilisers
                (i) Name of manufacture/PHA/importer
                (ii) Trade mark and/or brand name
                (iii) Name of the Fertiliser
                (iv) Percent nutrient,
                              N
                              P (AP)
                              P(WS)
                              K
                              S
                (v) Groos and net weight in kilogram
                (vi) Batch number (if applicable)
                (vii) MRP (inclusive of aal taxes)
                (viii) Month and year of manufacture/importer
                (ix) Subsidy per bag paid by the Government of India

    b) On containers of NP/NPK complexes Fertilisers
                (i)Name of manufacture/PHA/importer
                (ii)Trade mark and/or brand name
                (iii)Name of the Fertiliser
                (iv)Percent nutrient,

                                                            22
                           N
                           P(T)
                           P(AP)
                           P(WS)
                           K
                           S
                (v)Gross and net weight in kilogram
                (vi)Batch number (if applicable)
                (vii)MRP (inclusive of all taxes)
                (viii)Month and year of manufacture/importer
                (ix)Subsidy per bag paid by the Government of India

c) On Containers of Physical/Granulated NPK/Micronutrient mixture/NPK with
     Micronutrient mixtures/ special mixtures

                (i) Name of manufacturer
                (ii) Manufacturing certificate Number
                (iii) Trade mark and/or brand name
                (iv) Name of the Fertiliser
                (v) Percent nutrient,

                         N(T)
                         P(AP)
                         P(WS)
                         K
                         S
                Zn/Fe/Cu/Mn/B/Mo/Zn-EDTA/Fe-EDTA
                (vi) Gross and net weight in kilogram
                (vii) Batch number
                (viii) MRP (inclusive of all taxes)
                (ix) Month and year of manufacture/importer

d) On containers of Micronutrient fertilisers

                (i) Name of manufacture/importer
                (ii) Manufacturing/ registration certificate Number
                (iii) Trade mark and/or brand name
                (iv) Name of the Fertiliser
                (v) Percent nutrient
                Zn/Fe/Cu/Mn/B/Mo/Zn-EDTA/Fe-EDTA
                (vi) Gross and net weight in kilogram
                (vii) Batch number

                                                            23
                (viii) MRP (inclusive of all taxes)
                (ix) Month and year of manufacture/importer

e) On Container of Customised Fertiliser

                (i) Name of manufacture
                (ii) Trade mark and/or brand name
                (iii) Name (grade) of customized Fertiliser
                (iv) Percent nutrient,
                (v) Name of the crop and geographical area for which the CF
                (vi) Gross and net weight in kilogram
                (vii) MRP (inclusive of all taxes)
                (viii) Month and year of manufacturing

Clause-21A: Manufacturers to comply with certain requirements for laboratory facilities

         Every manufacturer shall in order to ensure quality of their product, possess minimum
laboratory facilities as may be specified from time to time by the Controller.

    (a) List of equipments required for Laboratory of SSP plants

Sl.No             Instruments                            Number

                                          Standard SSP Plant     Small size SSP
                                                                     Plants

1      Electronic Analytical Balance      1                           1

2      pH Meter                           1                           1

3      Sieve Shaker                       1                           1

4      Oven                               2                           1

5      Muffle Furnace                     1                           1

6      Vacuum Pump                        1                           1

7      Hot Plate                          4                           2

8      Deioniser                          1                           1

9      Sample Grinder                     4                           2

10 Water distillation Plant               2                           -

11 Magnetic Stirrer                       2                           1

12                             Other routine equipments

    (b) Equipments required for Laboratory of Micronutrient Fertilisers (Straight)

S.No                   Instruments                            Number

1 Spectrophotometer                                              1

2 pH Meter                                                       1

                                      24
3 Electronic Analytical Balance                        1

4 Deioniser                                            1

5 Water Distillation plant                             1

6 Other routine equipment

(c) Equipments required for Laboratory of NPK Mixture

S.No         Instruments                               Number
                                                           2
1 Analytical Balance                                       1
2 Chemical Balance                                         1
3 Oven                                                     1
4 Muffle Furnace                                           4
5 Hot plate                                                2
6 Vacuum Pump                                              4
7 Heating Mantle                                           2
8 Sample Grinder                                           2
9 Kjeldahl Digestion and Distillation unit                 2
10 Water Bath-cum- Shaker                                  2
11 Deionser                                                2
12 Water Distillation Plant                                2
13 Refrigerator
14 Other routine equipments

(d) Equipments required for Laboratory of Mixture of Micronutrient Fertilisers (Without
    NPK)

S.No         Instruments                               Number
                                                           1
1 Atomic absorption Spectrophotometer                      1
2 Spectrophotometer                                        1
3 pH Meter                                                 1
4 Electronic Analytical Balance                            1
5 Deioniser                                                1
6 Water Distillation plant
7 Other routine equipment

(a) Equipments required for Laboratory of Mixture of Micronutrient Fertilisers (With
    NPK)

S.No         Instruments                               Number
                                                           1
1 Atomic absorption Spectrophotometer                      1
2 Spectrophotometer

                                 25
3 pH Meter                                         1

4 Electronic Analytical Balance                    1

5 Deioniser                                        1

6 Water Distillation plant                         1

7 Sieve Shaker                                     1

8 Other routine equipment

Clause -22: Bulk sale of Fertilisers

         Normally, fertilizers are sold in bagged form. However, under Clause 22 a Retail Dealer
is allowed to keep one bag of each type of fertilizer in open condition for sale.

         A manufacturer/importer may sell the fertillser manufactured/imported by him in
bulk to a manufacturer of mixture of fertilisers, compound / complex fertilisers or special
mixture of fertilisers

         The Central Government may by notification published in the Official Gazette in this
behalf authorise a manufacturer/importer to sell any fertiliser manufactured/ imported by
him In bulk also direct to farmers for such period as may be specified in that notification;

         Provided that a certificate indicating the minimum guaranteed percentage of plant
nutrients is issued by the manufacturer/importer to each farmer at the time of such sale.

Clause ­ 23: Disposal of Non-standard Fertilisers

         The sale of non-standard fertilizers to the farmers is strictly prohibited. In FCO special
provision has been madefor disposal of non-standard fertilizers. The bags of non-standard
fertilizers are to be marked with the word `Non Standard' and `X' in red colour. It can be sold
only to manufacturers of mixtures of fertilizers or special mixture of fertilizers of research
farms of Universities or such bodies. Dealer has to apply in form `H' and Notified Authority
will issue the authorization in Form I after fixing the price and indicating validity period. For
fixing the price, the representative sample of non-standard stock is to be drawn by the
Fertiliser Inspector and after analysis of the sample in a notified laboratory, the price of the
non-standard fertilizer, based on nutrient content is fixed.

         Where any fertiliser imported by the Central Government is found to be of non-
standard and the Central Government decides that the fertilizer cannot be permitted for
direct use in agriculture, it may permit the use of such fertiliser by manufacturers of complex
fertilisers, mixture of fertilisers or special mixture of fertilisers to be sold at such price as may
be fixed by the Central Government.

         If a manufacture or importer detects or as reasonable doubt about the standard of
the fertilizer manufactured or imported by him, and dispatched for sale as deteriorated in
quality during transit due to natural calamity and is not of the prescribed standards, he may,
within fifteen days from the date of dispatch from factory or port, apply with detailed

                                      26
justifications to the Central Government for obtaining permission for reprocessing the same
in a factory to meet the prescribed standards and the Central Government may, after
considering the facts, permit the re-processing of such fertilizer on the terms and conditions
as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf.

         Provided that no such application for permission to reprocess the fertilizer by the
manufacturer or importer shall be accepted by the Central Government after the expiry of
the said period of fifteen days.

                                                            27
                                                   EMBLEM
                                                   FORM H
      APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF PERMISSION TO SELL NON-STANDARD FERTILISERS
To
The Notified Authority
State of ........................
    (1) Full Name and address of the applicant:
    (2) The name of fertilisers in which the applicant has been authorized to carry on
         business:
    (3) Number and date of authorization letter granted in favour of the applicant"
    (4) (i) Analysis Report by notified fertiliser control laboratory attached ­ Yes/No
         (ii) The source from which the fertilisers were originally purchased and the period
         during which they have been held by the applicant
         I enclose a copy of the authorization letter for dealing in fertilisers already granted to
         me and I have deposited the prescribed fee for permission to sell non-standard
         fertilisers.
         I certify that I will comply with the requirements of sub-clause (a) of clause 23 of FCO
         1985.

         Signature of the applicant
         Name and address of applicant in block letter

         Date:
         Place:

                                                            28
                                                   EMBLEM
                                                    FORM I
Book No...............................Date of issue...........................
Valid up to...............................
                AUTHORISATION FOR THE SALE OF NON-STANDARD FERTILISERS
M/s.................................................................. is/are hereby permitted to sell the non-standard
fertilisers described below subject to the terms and conditions noted hereunder.
Particulars of non-standard fertiliser
    (1) Name of the fertiliser:
    (2) Place of location of the non-standard fertiliser
Terms and conditions:
    (1) The seller of the non-standard fertiliser described above shall comply with the
         provision of sub-clause (a) of Clause 23 of the FCO1985.
    (2) The non-standard fertiliser described above shall be sold at a price not exceeding
         Rs.......... Per metric tonne.
Date:Notified Authority
Seal:State of

                                                            29
Clause -24: Manufactures / Pool Handling Agencies to Appoint Officers Responsible with
Compliance of the Order

         Every manufacturing organization, importer and pool handling agency shall appoint in
that organization and in consultation with the Central Government, an officer, who shall be
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Order.

Clause -25: Restriction on Sale / Use of Fertilisers

The sale / use of fertilizers for the purposes other than agriculture i.e., industrial purposes, is
prohibited, except with the prior permission of the Central Government. However, no prior
permission is required for industrial use, if the fertilizer is purchased from the "Industrial
Dealer" possessing a valid CR issued by Controller of Fertilisers, in accordance with the
provisions of clauses 9-11 of FCO.

The price of the fertilisers permitted for sale for industrial use the MRP fixed is excluding all
subsidies at the production, import, and handling and wherever customs or excise duties are
chargeable, these may be added to the price so fixed.

In the case of non-standard fertilisers, reductions shall be made from the no profit no loss
price, indicated above, proportionate to the loss of nutrient contents.

Any person possessing a valid certificate of registration for Industrial dealer, unless such
person is a State Government, a manufacturer/importer or a pool handling agency, shall not
carry on the business of selling fertilisers for agricultural purposes, including a wholesale
dealer or a retail dealer. However, in case of a State Government, a manufacturer or an
importer or a pool handling agency possessing a valid certificate of registration for sale of
fertiliser for industrial use, and also for sale of fertiliser for agricultural use, whether in
wholesale or retail or both, shall not carryon the business of selling fertilisers both for
Industrial use and agricultural use In the same premises.

                            VII ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES

Clause-26: Appointment of Registering Authority

         The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such
number of persons, as it thinks necessary, to be registering authorities for the purpose of this
Order and may, in any such notification define the limits of local area within which each such
registering authority shall exercise his jurisdiction.

Duty and responsibility of Registering Authority under Clause 26

    (1) Appoint under clause 26 of FCO1985 by Central Government and State Government
    (2) Registering Authority at Central level has the power to issue Certificate of Registration

         for Industrial Dealer and their renewal and suspension/cancellation.

                                                            30
(3) Registering Authority at State levelhas the power to issue certificate of manufacture

of physical mixture fertilisres/Granulated mixture fertilisers/special mixtures and

micronutrient mixture fertiliser.

(4) Renewal of the Certificate of manufacture

(5) Amendment of the additional Grades notified by the state Government in the

Certificate of manufacture.

(6) Issue duplicate copy of the certificate of manufacture

(7) Amend change of address

(8) Permission grant for purchase of raw materials such as subsidy fertiliser and whom to

purchase, the quantity to purchase and their period.

(9) Application received from the applicant for Certificate of Manufacture for physical

mixture or granulated mixture or special mixture the certificate should issue within

forty five days from the date of receipt of the application. If refuse to grant certificate

of manufacture should be recorded in writing and pass order.

(10)  Periodically inspect the mixing unit and the laboratory running condition

(11)  Registering Authority can exercise the power within his jurisdiction

Clause -26 A: Notified Authority

The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such number of
persons, as it thinks necessary, to be Notified Authorities for the purpose of this Orderand
define the local limits within which each such Notified Authority shall exercise his jurisdiction.

Duty and responsibility of Notified Authority under clause 26A

(1) Appoint under clause 26A of FCO1985 by State Government

(2) To acknowledge the Letter of Authority for whole sale dealer and retail dealer in A2

Form

(3) Renewal of Letter of Authority within three years or one month grace period for

certain cases with penalty

(4) Suspension/cancellation or debarment of Letter of Authority whether whole sale or

retail as the case may be

(5) Once cancel the Letter of Authority the dealer may be allowed to dispose the balance

stock for the period of thirty days if any held him. Any balance stock lying with the

dealer after the said period of thirty days shall be confiscated under clause 7 & 8.

(6) Issue authorization for the sale of non-standard fertiliser in Form I

(7) Issue duplicate copy of Letter of Authorisation

(8) Amendment made in additional fertilisers in Letter of Authorisation

(9) Amendment made in Letter of Authorisation for change of address

(10)  Notified Authority can exercise the power within his jurisdiction

Clause ­ 27: Appointment of Inspectors

                                        31
         The Central Government or the State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint such number of persons, as it thinks necessary, to be Inspectors of Fertilisers
for the purpose of this Order and define the local limits of local area within which each such
Inspector shall exercise his jurisdiction.

Clause - 27 A: Qualification for Appointment of Fertiliser

    No person shall be eligible for appointment as Fertiliser Inspector under this Order unless
he possesses the following qualifications, namely:-

    (1) Graduate in agriculture or science with Chemistry as one of the subjects from a
         recognized university; and

    (2) Training or experience in the quality control of fertilizers and working in the State or
         Central Government Department of Agriculture.

Clause - 27 AA: Regular Training of Fertiliser Inspectors

         Every Fertiliser Inspector appointed under Clause -27 shall undergo training after
every three years in the Central Fertiliser Quality Control and Training Institute at Faridabad
or any Regional Fertiliser Control Laboratoty at Mumbai,Kalyani or Chennai.

Clause-27B: Qualification for appointment of Fertiliser Inspectors for Biofertilisers,Organic
                Fertilisers and Non-edible de-oiled cake fertilisers

         No person shall be eligible for appointment as Inspector of biofertiliser.Organic
Fertiliser and non-edible de-oiled cake Fertiliser unless he may possess the following
qualifications.

    (1) Graduate in Agriculture or Science with Chemistry/Microbiology as one the subject
         and

    (2) Training or experience in the field of quality control of biofertilisers/organic
         fertilisers/non-edible de-oiled cake fertiliser.

Clause ­ 28: Powers of Fertiliser Inspectors

    a) To ask any information about manufacture/importer/pool handing agency/Whole sale
         dealer or retail dealer regarding the trade of fertilisers

    b) To draw samples of fertilizers

    c) To enter upon and search any premises where fertilizers are manufactured, stocked
         or sold;

    d) To seize and detain any fertilizer, books of accounts or documents relating to
         manufacture, storage, sale etc. of fertilizers in respect of which he has reasons to be
         believe that the contravention or order has been or is being or is about to be
         committed.

                                                            32
    e) To stop, search any person or any vehicle or any receptacle used or intended to be
         used for the export of fertilizers from one State to another (Cl. 4 of FMCO).

    f) To seize fertilizer along with packages etc., or animals, vehicles, vessels, conveyance
         etc. used in carrying such fertilizers and ensure their production in Court (Cl. 4 of
         FMCO)

    g) Any fertiliser is seized by an Inspector he must report to the concern Collector with in
         the reasonable time limit under the provision of section 6A,6B,6C,6D and 6E of ECA
         1955

    h) Every person, if so required by an inspector, shall be bound to afford all necessary
         facilities to him for the purpose of enabling him to exercise his power under this
         clause.

    i) Any person contravene any Clauses or the Fertiliser Inspector has believe that the
         quality of the fertiliser is in doubt, he may issue stop sale notice to the
         dealer/manufacture/pool handling agency or marketer as the case may be with in a
         period of twenty one days. If no action taken by the fertiliser inspector within twenty
         one days the stop sale notice automatically deemed to revoked.

Duty and Responsibilities of Fertiiser Inspectors:-

Inspection and verification of Certificate of Registration, Letter of Authorisation, Certificate of
Manufacture etc. issued under FCO., 1985.

To ensure compliance of specific conditions of Certificate of Registration / Authorisation
Letter / Manufacture such as;

Verify the Display of stock position / price list / Certificate of registration / Authorisation Letter
by a dealer

Check Disposal of non-standard fertilisers as per authorization.

Allow only one fertilizer bag kept in open at a time for retail sale.

Checking of stock position and price of fertilisers and

Illegal movement (means without invoice and Delivery chalan)

Verify the sale of fertilisersnon-agriculturalpurpose that is other than agriculture use

Checking of Packing and marking requirements of bags as per FCO 1985 APPENDIX 2

Verify the Cash memo and Stock Register as per Form M and Form N respectively

Drawl fertiliser samples and dispatch to the Lab with in stipulated time limit with in a period
of three working days from the date of its drawl.

Issue Analytical report within seven days from the date of receipt to which the sample whom
to drawn

                                                            33
Follow-up action and launching of prosecution in Court of Law, after seeking approval of the
competent authority, if needed.

Clause ­ 28A: Appointment of officer for keeping the sample in custody

The State Government may, by Notification in official gazette appoints as Officer not below
the rank of Joint Director of Agriculture for keeping the samples in its custody and for sending
the second part for analysis to National Test House and the third part for referee analysis.

Clause 28B: Sample drawn by the Inspector

    1. Out of three parts made by the Inspector drawn under Sub-clause 6 of Clause 28 , the
         first part shall be sent to any of the State Government notified laboratory by the State
         Inspector under intimation to the Officer notified under Clause 28A. And the second
         part and third part shall be kept in custody of officer nominated by the State
         Government.

    2. The company or dealer from whom sample is drawn may request to such authority
         within one week of date of drawal of sample, to send the second part of the sample
         to any of the National Test House Laboratories on payment of fees as provided by the
         Central Government time to time and in case, there is variation in the result of the
         first and second analysis, then the said authority invariably shall send the third part of
         the sample to the Central Fertiliser Quality Control & Training Institute, Faridabad for
         final referee analysis.

    3. In case where the sample is drawn by the Central Government inspector, then out of
         three parts made by the Inspector, the first part shall be sent to any of the Regional
         Control Laboratories at Mumbai, Kalyani or Chennai and the second part and third
         part shall be kept in the custody of Incharge of Regional Fertiliser Control Laboratory,
         Chennai, Kalyani or Mumbai as the case may be.

    4. The company or dealer from whom the sample is drawn may request within one week
         to such authority to send the second part of the sample to any of the National Test
         House Laboratories on payment of fees as provided by the Central Government from
         time to time and in case there is variation in the result of the first and second analysis,
         then such authority invariably send the third part of the sample to the Central
         Fertiliser Quality Control & Training Institute Faridabad for final referee analysis.

    5. The reference analysis report received from the Laboratory shall be treated as final.
    6. In case where the appeal of non-standard fertilizer under Sub-Clause 3 of Clause 32

         and sub-clause 3 of Clause 32 A have not been considered then the report of the
         Regional Fertiliser Control Laboratory or the Notified Fertiliser Testing Laboratory as
         the case may be shall be treated as final.

    Clause-28C: Inspection Team

                                                            34
    The central government shall constitute a Inspection Team or Teams headed by an officer
    not below the rank of Director or equivalent and comprising of four other officers not
    below the rank of Asst.Section Officer or equivalent.

    Provided that one of the Member shall possess the minimum qualification and training
    prescribed for the Fertiliser Inspector in Clause 27A of FCO.

    Clause-28D: Power of Inspection Team

    The inspection team shall exercise all the powers assigned to Fertiliser Inspector under
    item (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of sub-clause(1)of Clause 28 and Sub-Clauses (2)(3) and (4) of
    Clause 28 of Fertiliser (Inorganic, Organic or Mixed) (Control) Order 1985.

                                  VIII Analysis of Samples

Clause ­ 29: Laboratory for Analysis

Any fertilizer sample, drawn by an Inspector, shall be analysed as per Schedule II Part-B in the
Central Fertiliser Quality Control & Training Institute (CFQC&TI), Faridabad or Regional
Fertiliser Control Laboratories (RFCL) at Navi Mumbai, Chennai and Kalyani (Kolkatta) or in
any other laboratory notified for this purpose by the State Governments.

Any Bio fertiliser sample drawn by an Inspector, shall be analyzed as per Schedule III Part ­ D
in National Centre for Organic Farming,Ghaziabad or Regional Centre for Organic Farming at
bangaluru,Bhubaneswar,Hisar,Imphal,Jabalpur,and Nagpur or in any other laboratory
notified by the Central or State Government.

Organic fertiliser and Non-edible de-oiled cake fertiliser samples drawn by an Inspector, shall
be analysed as per Schedule IV Part ­ D in National Centre for Organic Farming,Ghaziabad or
Regional Centre for Organic Farming at bangaluru, Bhubaneswar, Hisar, Imphal, Jabalpur and
Nagpur or in any other laboratory notified by the Central or State Government.

Every laboratory notified under this clause should possess minimum laboratory equipment
and other laboratory facilities as may be specified from time to time by the Controller of
Fertilizer.

Clause ­ 29A: Qualification for appointment of Fertiliser Analyst in the Fertiliser Control
Laboratory

For appointment of Fertiliser Analyst in the Fertiliser Control Laboratory, the qualification and
experience/ training under Clause 29A are as follows:-

    (1) Graduate in agriculture or science with chemistry asone of the subjects from a
         recognized University ; and

    (2) Training in fertilizer quality control and analysis at Central Fertiliser Quality Control &
         Training Institute, Faridabad.

                                                            35
Clause-29AA:Regular training of Fertiliser Analyst ­ Every fertilizer analyst shall undergo
training after every 3 years in the Central Fertiliser Quality Control & Training Institute or any
Regional Fertiliser Control Laboratory at Mumbai, Kalyani or Chennai.

Clause-29AB:No person shall be eligible to be notified as Analyst for analysis of sample of Bio-
fertiliser, Organic Fertiliser and non-edible de-oiled cake fertilisers in the Laboratories notified
under Sub-Clause (1A) and (1B) of Clause 29 unless the Analyst possess the following
qualifications namely:

    (a) Post-graduate degree in Agricultural Chemistry and Soil Science or Microbiology or
         Plant Pathology or Chemistry pr Bio-Technology or Horticulture or Bio-Engineering

    (b) Training in analysis of bio-fertiliser, organic fertilizer and non-edible de-oiled cake
         fertilisers at National Centre for Organic Farming or at a recognized Laboratory or
         Institute.

Provided that the analyst who has been appointed prior to date of commencement of this
order, but does not possess the requisite training or experience in analysis of bio-fertiliser,
organic fertilizer and non-edible de-oiled cake shall undergo prescribed training at the
National Centre for Organic Farming or at a recognized lab or institute within a period of three
years from the date of such commencement.

Clause ­ 29B: Referee Laboratories

Every Laboratory notified under Clause 29 designated as Referee Laboratory with the
following stipulations:-

   i. Such lab, which carried out the first anlaysis of the fertilizer sample shall not be
       designated in respect of that sample

  ii. In respect of any sample the anlaysis of which has been challenged, may be sent for
       referee analysis of which has been challenged, may be sent for referee anlaysis to any
       of the other laboratory except those which are located in the State or where the first
       analysis has been done

 iii. The CFQC&TI, Faridabad and its RFCLs shall be considered as one group of Laboratories
       and a sample first analysed in any of them, shall not be sent to any other Laboratory in
       that group, but only to any other laboratories notified by a State Govt.

 iv. Any aggrieved person appeal to appellate authority for their non-standard report of first
       analysis and the report of referee analysis (second analysis) having wide variation or
       declare different parameters as the case may be the appellate authority decide and
       send the third sample for analysis to any of the National Test House Laboratories at
       Chennai, Kolkata,Mumbai,Ghaziabad or Jaipur.

Clause ­ 29C: Laboratories for referee analysis of Biofertiliser

                                                            36
National Centre for Organic Farming,Ghaziabad or Regional Centre for Organic Farming at
Bengaluru,Bhubaneswar,Hisar,Imphal,Jabalpur,and Nagpur or in any other laboratory
notified by the Central or State Government shall be designated as referee laboratory for the
purpose of analysis of Biofertiliser sample.

No such laboratory which carried out the first analysis of Biofertiliser sample shall be so
designated in respect of that sample and in respect of any such sample the analysis of which
has been challenged, may be sent for referee analysis to any one of the other laboratories
except those which are located in the state or where the first analysis has been done.

National Centre for Organic Farming,Ghaziabad or Regional Centre for Organic Farming at
Bengaluru,Bhubaneswar,Hisar,Imphal,Jabalpur,and Nagpur shall be consider as one group of
laboratories and a sample first analysed by any one of them,shall not be sent for referee
analysis to any other in that group but only to any other state Government notified
laboratories.

Clause ­ 29D: Laboratories for referee analysis of Organic fertiliser

National Centre for Organic Farming,Ghaziabad or Regional Centre for Organic Farming at
Bengaluru,Bhubaneswar,Hisar,Imphal,Jabalpur,and Nagpur or in any other laboratory
notified by the Central or State Government shall be designated as referee laboratory for the
purpose of analysis of Organic fertiliser sample.

No such laboratory which carried out the first analysis of Organic fertiliser sample shall be so
designated in respect of that sample and in respect of any such sample the analysis of which
has been challenged, may be sent for referee analysis to any one of the other laboratories
except those which are located in the state or where the first analysis has been done.

National Centre for Organic Farming,Ghaziabad or Regional Centre for Organic Farming at
Bengaluru,Bhubaneswar,Hisar,Imphal,Jabalpur,and Nagpur shall be consider as one group of
laboratories and a sample first analysed by any one of them, shall not be sent for referee
analysis to any other in that group but only to any other state Government notified
laboratories.

Clause-30: Time Limit for Analysis and Communication of Result

    1. Where sample of fertilizer has been drawn, the sample shall be despatched alongwith
         a Memorandum in Form K and incase of organic fertilizer, bio-fertilisers and non-
         edible de-oiled fertilisers in Form K to the Laboratory for anlaysis within a period of
         three working days from the date of its drawal.

    2. Laboratory shall analyse the sample and forward the anlaysis report to the authority
         specified in the Memorandum referred ton in sub-clause 1 in the following manner
         namely:

         a. In case of fertilizer other than bio-fertiliser, organic fertilizer and de-oiled cake
             fertilizer the anlaysis report shall be in Form L and forwarded within Fifteen days
                                                            37
         b. In case of the sample of organic fertilizer the analysis report shall be in Form L1
             and forwarded within 30 days.

         c. In case of bio-fertiliser, the analysis report shall be Form L2 and forwarded within
             45 days

         d. In case of de-oiled cake fertilisers the analysis report shall be in Form L3 and
             forwarded within thirty days from the days of receipt of the sample in the
             Laboratory

    3. The authority to whom the anlaysis report is sent, under sub-clause (2) shall
         communicate the result of the anlaysis report tothe
         dealer/manufacturer/importer/pool handling agency from whom the sample was
         drawn within seven days from the date of receipt of analysis report of the laboratory.

                                        IX MISCELLANEOUS

Clause-31: Suspension, Cancellation or Debarment

(1) A Notified Authority, registering authority, or as the case may be, the controller may,
     after giving the authorized dealer or the holder of certificate of registration or certificate
     of manufacture or any other certificate granted under this Order, an opportunity of being
     heard, suspend such authorization letter or certificate or debar the dealer from carrying
     on the business of fertilizer on one or more of the following grounds, namely
     (a) The authorization letter or certificate of registration or certificate of manufacture, as
          the case may be, has been obtained by willful suppression of material facts or by
          misrepresentationofrelevantparticulars:

     (b) Any of the provisions of this Order or any terms and condition of the Memorandum
          of Intimation or certificate of registration or the certificate of manufacture, as the
          case may be, has been contravened or not fulfilled:

         Provided that while debarring from carrying on the business of fertiliser or canceling
the certificate, the dealer or the certificate holder thereof may be allowed for a period of
thirty days to dispose of the balance stock of fertilizers, if any, held by him Provided further
that the stock of fertilizer lying with the dealer after the expiry of the said period of thirty days
shall be confiscated.

(2) Where the contravention alleged to have been committed by a person is such as would,
     on being proved, justify his debarment from carrying on the business of selling of fertilizer
     or, cancellation of authorization letter or certificate of registration or certificate of
     manufacture or any other certificate granted under this Order to such person the Notified
     Authority or registering authority or, as the case may be, without any notice, suspend
     such certificate, authorization letter, as an interim measure:

                                                            38
         Provided that the registering authority, Notified Authority or, as the case may be, the
controller shall immediately furnish to the affected person details and the nature of
contravention alleged to have been committed by such person and, after giving him an
opportunity of being heard, pass final orders either revoking the order of suspension or
debarment within fifteen days from the date of issue of the order of suspension:

         Provided further that where no final order is passed within the period as specified
above, the order of interim suspension shall be deemed to have been revoked without
prejudice, however, to any further action which the registering authority, Notified Authority
or, as the case may be, the controller may take against the affected person under sub-clause
(1).

(3) Wherever an authorization letter or certificate is suspended, cancelled or the person is
     debarred from carrying on the business of fertiliser, the Notified Authority, registering
     authority, or as the case may be, the Controller shall record a brief statement of the
     reasons for such suspension or, as the case may be, cancellation or debarment and
     furnish a copy thereof to the person whose certificate or authorization letter has been
     suspended or cancelled or business has been debarred.

(4) Wherever the person alleged to have committed the contravention is an industrial dealer,
     the Notified Authority may take action against the holder of such certificate of
     Registration under sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (2):

         Provided that where such certificate is suspended or cancelled, the Notified Authority
shall, within a period of fifteen days from the date of issue of such order of suspension or
cancellation, furnish to the controller also, besides sending the same to the person whose
certificate has been suspended or cancelled, a detailed report about the nature of
contravention committed and a brief statement of the reasons for such suspension or, as the
case may be, cancellation:

         Provided further that the controller, shall, in case of the order for suspension passed
by the Notified Authority, on receipt of the detailed report and after giving the person an
opportunity of being heard, pass final order either revoking the order of suspension or
canceling the certificate of registration, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the
detailed report from the Notified Authority, failing which the order of interim suspension
passed by the Notified Authority shall be deemed to have been revoked, without prejudice
however, to further action which the controller may take against the holder of certificate
under sub-clause (1):

         Provided also that the order of cancellation passed by the Notified Authority shall
remain effective as if it had been passed by the controller till such time the Controller, on
receipt of the detailed report from the Notified Authority, and if deemed necessary, after
giving the person a fresh opportunity of being heard, pass the final order either revoking or
confirming the order of cancellation.

                                                            39
Clause-32: Appeal at Central Level

(1) In any State, where the fertiliser allocation is made by the Central Government under this
     Order and if the suspension or cancellation of authorization letter of the manufacturer
     and or pool handling agency or debarment of business, in any way, has an effect of
     dislocating the said allocation and if the Central Government is of the opinion that it is
     necessary or expedient so to do for maintaining the supplies, may direct the concerned
     State Government to furnish detailed report about the nature ofcontravention and a brief
     statement of the reasons for such suspension or cancellation and pass such order as it
     may think fit, confirming, modifying or annulling the order of State Government.

        Provided that if the report called by the Central Government is not received from the
State Government within a period of fifteen days from the date of issue of the
communication, the Central Government may decide the case without the report, on merit.

(2) Omitted vide S.O. 623 E dtd 18.02.23
(3) In case where the company or dealer has not applied for the second analysis due to some

     valid reason then the company or dealer may made an appeal to the Controller as the
     case may be within 7 days from the date of receipt of analysis report of first part of the
     sample and the Controller shall decide on the grounds of the fact whether the matter
     qualifies to be considered for third analysis.

(4)The controller after providing an opportunity to the aggrieved party of being heard may
     send the third sample for analysis to the laboratory and specified under sub-clause 3 of
     Clause 29B.

(5) The result of the third analysis shall supersede the first analysis and referee analysis report
     and shall be treated as final.

Clause-32A: Appeal atthe StateGovernment Level

(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify such authority
     as the Appellate authority before whom the appeals may be filed within 30 days from the
     date of the order appealed against by any person, except by an industrial dealer,
     aggrieved by any of the following Orders or action of registering authority or a Notified
     Authority, namely:-

    (i) Refusing to grant a certificate of manufacture for preparation of mixture of fertilisers
          or special mixture of fertilizers; or

    (ii) Suspending or canceling a certificate of manufacture; or

    (iii) Suspending or canceling authorization letter or debarring from carrying on the
          business of selling of fertilizer, or

    (iv) Non-issuance of certificate of manufacture within the stipulated period; or

    (v) Non-issuance of amendment in authorization letter within the stipulated period.

                                                            40
(2) Omitted vide S.O. No.623 (E) dtd 08.02.2023
(3) In cases where the company or dealer has not applied for the second anlaysis due to some

     valid reason then the company or dealer may made an appeal in the fertilizer (inorganic
     or organic or mixed) (Control) Order 1985 to the Appellate Authority and the Appellate
     Authority shall reside on the grounds of the fact whether the matter qualifies to be
     considered for third analysis.
(4) The Appellate authority after providing an opportunity to the aggrieved party of being
     heard may send the sample for analysis to the Laboratory specified under Sub-clause 3 of
     Clause 29B.
(5) The result of the third analysis referred to in Sub-C lause 4 shall supersede the report of
     first analysis and referee analysis and shall be treated as final.

Clause-33: Grant of duplicate Copies of Authorisation Letter or Certificate of Manufacture,
              Certificate of Registration,etc

         Where authorization letter or a certificate of registration or a certificate of
manufacture or any other certificate granted or renewed under this Order is lost or defaced,
the notified authority registering authority or, as the case may be, the Controller may, on
an_application made in this behalf, together with the fee prescribed for this purpose under
clause 36, grant a duplicate copy of such certificate.

Clause-34: Amendment of Certificate of Registration

         The Notified Authority, registering or controller, as the case may be, may, on
application being made by the holder of an authorization letter, a certificate of registration
or certificate of manufacture, together with the fee prescribed for the purpose under clause
36, amend an entry in such authorization letter, certificate of registration or certificate of
manufacture as the case may be.

    (1) Amendment of new fertilsers in Letter of Authority
    (2) Amendment of New grade of Mixture of fertilisers in Certificate of Manufacture
    (3) Amendment of change of address
    (4) Amendment of additional Form O

Clause -35: Maintenance of Records and Submission of Returns

         The controller may by an order made in writing direct the dealers. manufacturers/
importers, and pool handling agencies:-

     (a) To maintain such books of accounts, records, etc. relating to their business in Form
          'N'., or maintain digital stock register in the form which clearly exhibit the date wise
          stock position, receipt during the day, sales during the day and closing stock.

     (b) To submit to such authority, returns and statements in such form and containing such
          information relating to their business and within such time as may be specified in that
          order.

                                                            41
(2) Where a person holds certificates of registration for retail sale and wholesale sale of
     fertilisers, he shall maintain separate books of accounts for these two types of sales made
     by him.

(3) Where a State Government, a manufacturer, an importer and a pool handling agency holds
     valid certificates of registration for sale of fertilisers in, wholesale or retail or both and
     also for sale for industrial use, he shall maintain separate books of accounts for these two
     or three types of sales made by him.

(4)Every importer shall inform the Director of Agriculture of the State in which he intends to
     discharge the imported fertilizer, under intimation to the Central Government, before
     the import is made or within a period of fifteen days after an indent for import is placed,
     the following details, namely ;-

         (i) Name of fertiliser

         (ii) Name of country of import.

         (iii) Name of manufacturer.

         (iv) Quantity to be imported

         (v) Date of arrival of the consignment.

         (vi) Name of the discharge port.

         (vii) Name designation of authority or responsible person along with mobile
                   number

         (viii) other information

Clause-36: Fees

  (1) The fees payable for grant, amendment or renewal of a[n authorization letter] or
        certificate of registration or certificate of manufacture a duplicate of such certificates
        or, renewal thereof under this Order shall be such as the State Government may, from
        time to time fix, subject to the maximum fees fixed for different purposes by the
        Central Government and different fees may be fixed for different purposes or for
        different classes of dealers or for different types of mixtures of fertiliser or special
        mixture.

  (2) The authority to whom and the manner, in which the fee fixed shall be paid, may be
        specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette.

  (3) Any fee paid shall not be refundable unless the grant or renewal of any certificate of
        registration or certificate of manufacture or duplicate copy of such certificate or
        renewal under this Order has been refused.

  (4) The fees payable for grant, amendment, renewal or duplicate copy of certificate of
        registration for industrial dealer and the authority to whom and the manner in which
                                                            42
such fee shall be paid, shall be such as may be specified by the Controller from time to
time by notification in the Official Gazette.

                               Fees for Industrial purpose

Sl. No  Name of certificate                                        Fees (in Rs.)
                                                                     1500.00
1 Fresh Certificate of Registration for Industrial Dealer            1500.00
                                                                       50.00
2 Renewal Certificate of Registration for Industrial Dealer
                                                                      100.00
3 Late fee for renewal certificate of registration for Industrial      50.00
       Dealer

4 Amendment in certificate of registration for Industrial Dealer

5 Duplicate/Additional copies certificate of registration for
       Industrial Dealer

         The application for the requisite certificate shall accompany with the Demand draft
for the specified amount drawn on any scheduled Bank payable at Delhi in favour of the
controller of fertilizers.

Clause 37 :Service of Orders and Directions

         Any order or direction made or issued by the Controller or by any other authority
under this Order shall be served in the same manner as provided in Sub Section (5) of Section
3 of the ECA.

Clause 38: Advisory Committee

         The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette and on such terms
and conditions as may be specified in such notification, constitute a Committee called the
Central Fertiliser Committee consisting of a Chairman and not more than ten other persons
having experience or knowledge in the field, who shall be members of the Committee, to
advise the Central Government regarding:-

    (i) Inclusion of a new fertiliser, under this Order;

    (ii) Specifications of various fertilisers;

    (iii) Grades/formulations of physical/granulated mixtures of fertilisers that can be
          allowed to be prepared in a State;

    (iv) Requirements of laboratory facilities in a manufacturing unit, including a unit
          manufacturing physical/granulated mixtures of fertilisers;

    (v) Methods of drawal and analysis of samples.

    (vi) Any other matter referred by the Central Government to the Committee.

        43
(2) The Committee may, subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make
     bye-laws fixing the quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all
     business to be transacted by it.

(3) The Committee may co-opt such number of experts and for such purposes or periods as it
     may deem fit, but any expert so co-opted shall not have the right to vote.

(4) The Committee may appoint one or more sub-committees, consisting wholly of members
     of the Committee or or partly of the members of the Committee and partly of co-opted
     members as it thinks fit, for the purpose of discharging such of its functions as may be
     delegated to such sub-committee or sub-committees by the Central Fertiliser Committee.

(5) The State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette and on such terms and
     conditions as may be specified in such notification, constitute a Committee called the
     State Fertiliser Committee consisting of a Chairman and not more than .4 other members,
     having experience or knowledge in the field, including a representative from State
     Agricultural University, the Fertiliser Industry and Indian Micro Fertilisers Manufacturers
     Association to advise the State Government regarding the grades/formulations of
     *mixture or of fertilisers.

Clause 38A: Central Bio-stimulant Committee:

         The Central Government may by notification in official gazettee constitute a
committee to be called Central Bio-stimulant Committee (CBC) with the Agricultural
Commissioner as its Chair person and seven other members subject to such terms and
conditions as may be specified therein.

2. The Central Bio-stimulant Committee shall advise the Central Government and the
   following issues namely

    1. Inclusion of a new bio-stimulanat
    2. Specification of various bio-stimulants
    3. Method of drawing of samples and its analysis
    4. Minimum requirement of Laboratory
    5. Method of testing bio-stimulants
    6. Any other matter referred to the committee by the Central Government

3. The committee may subject to the previous approval of the Central Government, make
   bye-law fixing the quorum and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all the
   business to be transacted by it.

4. The committee may co-opt such number of experts and for such purposes or periods as it
   may be deem fit, but any expert so co-opted shall not have the right to vote.

5. The committee may appoint one or more sub-committees consisting wholly of its members
   or partly of its members and co-opted members as it thinks fit, for the purpose of
   discharging such for its functions as may be delegated to such sub-committee.
                                                            44
6. The Central Bio-stimulant Committee shall frame guidelines laying down the requirements
   of the toxicology testing and other related test.

Clause 39: Repeal and Saving
         The Fertiliser Control Order, 1957 is hereby repealed except as respects things done

or omitted to be done under the said Order before the commencement of this Order.

                                                            45
              PROCEDURE FOR DRAWAL OF SAMPLES OF FERTILISERS

                                  SCHEDULE ­ II Part ­ A

    1. General requirement of sampling

         In drawing samples the following measures and precautions should be observed.

         a) Samples shall not be taken at a place exposed to rain / sun.
         b) The sampling instruments should be clean and dry.
         c) The fertiliser being sampled, the sampling instruments and the bags of samples

             should be free from any contamination.
         d) To draw a representative sample the contents of each bag selected for sampling

             should be thoroughly mixed.
         e) The sample should be kept in suitable clean dry and air tight glass or screwed hard

             polythene bottle of about 400 gm capacity or in a thick gauged polythene bag. This
             should be put in a cloth bag which may be sealed with the Inspector's seal.
             Thesealed cloth bag containing the sample and Form P shall be kept in another
             cloth bag which shall also sealed with the Inspector's seal.The identifiable details
             such as Sample number/code number or any other details shall be put on the cloth
             bag containing sample and Form P which enable its identifications.

                  Identifiable details may be put on the cloth bag such as:
                  (1) Date of sampling
                  (2) Name of the fertilizer
                  (3) Code No. of sample
    2. Sampling from baged materials :
         (i) Scale of sampling

         (a) Lot (for Manufacturers / Importers)

         (i) All bags in a single consignment of the material of the same grade and type
             drawn from a single hatch of manufacturer / importer shall constitute a lot.

(ii) If consignment is declared to consist of different batches of manufacturer / importer all
the bags of each batch shall constitute a separate lot.

         (ii) In the case of a consignment drawn from a continuous process 2000 bags or
                  100 tonnes of the material shall constitute a lot.

(b) Lot (for dealer)

(i) The lot is an identifiable quantity of the same grade and type of fertilizer stored in an
         identifiable place subject to a maximum limit of 100 tonnes.

      (ii) The stock of less than 100 tonnes with a dealer may also constitute one or more lot.
         If the fertilizer of different sources and brand is available in such quantities, the lot

                                                            46
         shall be identified by the Inspector based on visible appearance of bags, their packing
         and storage conditions.

The fertilizer bags are segregated fertilizer wise, manufacturer/importer wise, batchwise,
         and month and year of manufacture/import. One sample shall not normally
         represent the quantity exceeding 100 tonnes.

(c) Selection of bags for sampling

(i) The number of bags to be selected from a lot shall depend upon the size of the lot as
         given below:

Lot Size (No. of bags)      No. of bags to be selected for
           (N)                        sampling (n)

       Up to 10                              1
        11-100                               2
        101-200                              3
        201-400                              4
        401-600                              5
        601-800                              6
       801-1000                              7
      1001-1300                              8
      1301-1600                              9
      1601-2000                             10

The bags are normally stored in different layers and height, both in storage godown and
         shops, but if scattered should be first arranged in a systematic manner. Start counting
         from any bag randomly as 1,2,3,4..... up to r. `r' being equal to the integral of N/n.
         Every r th bag thus counted should be demarcated and withdrawn from the stock and
         sample shall be drawn only from those selected bags to prepare the composite
         sample.

For example there are 450 bags constituting a lot in a dealer shop

r=N=450 = 90

n5

Therefore every 90th bags should be taken out. Thus only 5 bags will be taken out and
         sample drawn from each bag and finally made one composite sample.

                        47
(ii) Sampling from big godown / high stackings
         If the procedure given above that is r th bag method is not possible to be adopted, the

sample should be drawn from the randomly selected fertilizer bags from different layers from
top and from all open sides in a zig zag manner.
(iii) Sampling from small godown

        All the fertilizer bags of the same grade and type of same manufacturer / importer
received on different dates shall be segregated and properly stacked. In case of batch wise
product i.e., SSP, NPK (M), NPK (GM), MNF, MNFM, organic, Bio and Non-edible Deoiled
Cakes, same grade and type of same batch no. of same manufacturer should be segregated
and assigned a lot and draw sample.
3. Sampling Instruments:
a) Sampling probe: The probe may comprise of a slotted single tube with solid cone tip made

         of stainless steel or brass. The length of the probe may be approximately 60 to 65 cm,
         the diameter is 1.5 cm, and the slot width may be 1.2 to 1.3 cm.

b) Sampling cup: The inside dimensions of cup mouth may be 2 x 25 cm, the height of cup is
         61/2 inches

c) Sampling probe a slotted double tube length is 4-1/2 -5 feet and diameter
1-1/4 to 1-1/2 inch (closed vertical tube).
d) Sampling scoop: Samples from the hatch can also be collected by a suitable scoop made

         of stainless steel or brass.
These are available in the local market otherwise fabricated.
4. Drawal of samples from bags:
(i) In case where the bag and fertilizer allows the use of sampling probe, following method

         may be used.

a. Place bag in horizontal position and mix thoroughly the content of the bags by jerking /
         rolling upside and down.

b. Make an X cut with a knife near at the corner.
c. With single tube probe insert diagonally from corner to corner with slot in down position.

         Turn it to bring the slot upwards to fill the probe and remove carefully so as not to
         drag material out of it with the bag edges.
d. Empty the probe on a clean dry and hard surface preparably polythene sheet.
e. Similarly repeat the process from other end of the bag, draw sample from each selected
         bag and put all the sample material at one place.

                                                            48
(ii) In case of High density polythene bags and also when the fertilizer material is not in free
flowing condition and having big and hard lumps the use of probe is not possible. In such
cases following method is used.

   a. Open the selected bags
   b. Take out the fertilizers from the bag on a level, put in a clean and hard surface
   c. Mix thoroughly and reduced by quartering method.
   d. Draw sample with the help of a suitable sampling device made of stainless steel or

       brass cup / scoop

(iii) Quartering Method
         If the composite sample collected from the different selected bag in larger than

required weight, it size shall be reduced by method of quartering as detailed below.
         Spread the composite sample on a level, clean hard surface or polythene sheet, flatten

it out and divide it into four equal parts. Remove any diagonally opposite parts. Mix the two
remaining parts together to form a cone, flatten out the cone and repeat the operation of
quartering till a composite sample of required weight is obtained.
(iv)Weight of the sample

         One sample of fertilizer shall have the approximate weight as follows:
   a. For straight micronutrient fertilizers: 100 g
    b. Chelated MNF & MNFM : 50 g or the minimum packing size of similar quantity

   c. For other fertilizer & mixtures : 400 g
   d.For 100% water soluble fertilizer and

         100% water soluble mixture of fertilizer : 100 g
5. Preparation of test sample and reference sample:
(i) The composite sample obtained above shall be divided into three approximately equal

     portions each of the weight as specified above. Each of these samples shall constitute
     the test sample.
(ii) The sample should be kept in suitable clean dry and air tight glass or screwed hard
     polythene bottle of about 400 gm capacity or in a thick gauged polythene bag. This should
     be put in a cloth bag which may be sealed with the Inspector's seal. Thesealed cloth bag
     containing the sample and Form P shall be kept in another cloth bag which shall also
     sealed with the Inspector's seal.
(iii) Out of three sealed samples, one sample shall be sent to the Incharge of the Fertiliser
     Testing Laboratory for analysis within a period of 3 working days from the date of its

                                                            49
     drawl.Another sample should be given to manufacturer / importer / dealer as the case
     may be alongwith a copy of the Form J.

         The Fertiliser Inspector has to send the third sample to the Higher Authority for
keeping in safe custody.

         Any of the latter two samples may be sent for referee analysis as provided for under
Sub-clause (2) of Clause 29B.
6. Sampling from Ship
Most of the imported fertilizer imported as bulk condition in ships.

1. Draw the samples, from the fertilizer being discharged from the ship on the wharf or silo
   as the case may be, periodically at the regular interval of five hours on first and last day of
   discharge and three hours on intermediate days. All the samples drawn on a particular day
   shall be mixed together to make day composite sample. If the day composite sample is
   larger than required its size shall be reduced by quartering method.

2. Then the ship composite sample shall be prepared by mixing part of each day composite.

7. Sampling from bulk carriers ­ trucks
         The sample can be drawn as per vertical probing procedure with the help of closed

vertical double tube probe. Draw 10 vertical cuts from the following locations relating to the
entire top of the conveyance. The 10 vertical cores are combined into a composite sample
8. Sampling from bulk materials in storage

         The bulk storage piles (level or flat) up to 100 tonnes could be sampled. Take 10 cores
to the maximum possible depth of the probe from the position mentioned below the figure
and all the cores are composited. (Using vertical double tube closed probe).
9.Sampling from Containers
(1) Minimum 5 bags shall be selected randomly from each container

(2) In case of large number of containers containing similar material, the containers shall be
   selected randomly as per following criteria:
          Up to 3 containers: From each container
          3 ­ 10 containers: 3 containers
          More than 10 containers: 5 containers

10. Preparation of documents:
         After preparation of composite sample, fill up Form- J in duplicate, Form-P in triplicate.

The Form ­J should be signed by the dealer / manufacturer / importer as the case may be or
his authorized persons and also signed by the Fertiliser Inspector. Fill up the Form-K . Then

                                                            50
the sample has to be dispatched by the Inspector to the Fertiliser Testing Laboratory along
with Form-K for analysis within a period of 3 working days from the date of its drawal.
11. Check points during sampling
a) Make sure that sampling instruments and bags are clean.
b) Segregate the fertilizer bags lot wise before sampling
c) Select requisite number of bags for sampling according to lot size.
d) In case of high stack, select bags from all directions, different layers and depth by

   randomly.
e) Mix the content of the bag thoroughly before sampling.
f) Always insert the probe diagonally from two sides of the bag placed horizontally with slot

   in downside.
g) If quantity is more, reduced the composite is done by only quartering method and divided

   in 3 equal parts.
h) The sample should be kept in airtight condition.
i) The cloth bag should be marked as follows

   (i) Date of sampling
   (ii)Name of fertilizer
   (iii) Code no. of sample
j) Form-P signed by the inspector and should be kept inside the cloth bag
k) The cloth bag should be sealed by the inspector. If possible the dealer seal also is affixed.
l) Prepare Form-J in duplicate (2 copies)
m) Form-J signed by the Inspector and get signature from dealer or on behalf his authorized
   person.
n) One sample and copy of the Form ­J handed over to dealer.
o) Another sample sent to the Laboratory along with Form ­K for analysis within a period of
   3 working days from the date of its drawal
p) The second and third sample should be handed over to the sample keeping officer under
   Clause 28A by the inspector and get acknowledgement
q) Use appropriate sampling instruments
r) Never draw one sample from a stock more than 100 tonnes or 2000 bags.
s) Never mix the fertilizer of different batch nos ./different manufacturers.
t) Never select the bags for sampling less than the number required as per the procedure.

                                                            51
u) Never try to reduce the weight of composite sample by any other method other than
   quartering.

v) The weight of each test sample should not be less than required weight.
w) Don't use sampling probe in HDPE packing
x) Fill up Form-J, Form-P and Form-K correctly.

                                     Schedule-1 Part-B
          PERMISSIBLE TOLERANCE LIMITS IN ANALYTICAL VARIATIONS

l.No.  Name of Fertiliser                                                Tolerance Limit

1. Straight Nitrogeneous Fertilisers, Straight Phosphatic Fertilisers, 0.5 Units for each

       Straight postassic fertilizers, Straight Sulphur Fertilisers, NP  Nutrient

       Complex Fertilisers, NPK Complex Fertilisers, Micro Nutrients,

       100% water soluble complex fertilizers, 100% water soluble

       mixture of fertilizers, Mixture of Fertilisers

2      For mixture of micro nutrient fertilizers                         10% of each nutrient or

                                                                         0.5 unit whichever is

                                                                         less subject to

                                                                         maximum of 7.5% of all

                                                                         the combined nutrients

3      For Customised fertilizers and Fortified fertilizers. Nutrient    0.5 Units for each

       level% for primary nutrient (NPK) and Secondary nutrient (S,Ca,   nutrients

       Mg)                                                               10% of each nutrient

       Micro nutrient

4      Particle                                                                          7 Units

5      Moisture                                                          0.3 Units

Note: The tolerance limit besides total nutrient shall also applicable on the forms of
nutrient subject to the condition that it shall not exceed the value of tolerance limit
applicable on the total nutrient.

                                                            52
FOLLOW UP ACTIONS AGAINST OFFENDERS TO BE TAKEN UNDER FCO 1985 & ECA 1955

Follow up actions against offender are broadly of two types:

1. Administrative Action

2. Legal Action

Administrative Action under FCO provisions:

   1. Stop Sale Notice ­Clause 28 (2)

   2. Detention / Seizure of stock ­ Clause 28 (1) (d)

   3. Temporary suspension of Certificate of Registration /Certificate of Manufacture /Letter
       of Authorisation under Clause 31 (2)

   4. Cancellation of Certificate of Registration /Certificate of Manufacture /Letter of
       Authorisation under Clause 31 (1)

   5. Seizure of conveyance ­ Under Section 6A of ECA 1955.

   6. Confiscation of stock under Section 6A of ECA.

1. Stop Sale Notice (Claus 28 (2)

         The Fertiliser Inspector is empowered to issue stop sale / detention notice in writing
under Clause 28(2). The Stop Sale /detention notice is valid for 21 days. If no action has been
initiated by the Inspector within the said period of 21 days from the date of issue of the said
notice, the notice of stop sale shall be deemed to have been revoked.

2. Suspension (Clause 31 (2) / Cancellation (Clause 31(1))

         The concerned Notified / Registering Authority is empowered to issue suspension of
Authorisation Letter or Certificate of Manufacture to any person contravened any of the
provisions of this order or any terms and conditions of the Memorandum of Intimation or
Certificate of Registration or the Certificate of Manufacture have been proved. The Notified
Authority or Registering Authority as the case may be without any notice, suspend such
Certificate of Manufacture or Authorisation Letter, as an interim measure.

         Provided that the Registering Authority or the Notified Authority as the case may be,
shall immediately furnish to the affected person , details and the nature of contravention
alleged to have been committed and after giving him an opportunity of being heard, pass final
orders either revoking the order of suspension or cancellation within 15 days.

         Where no final order is passed within the period of 15 days, the order of interim
suspension order shall be deemed to have been revoked.

         Under Clause 31(1) the Notified Authority or Registering Authority as the case may be
has been empowered to issue the cancellation of Authorisation Letter or Certificate of
Manufacture.

                                                            53
         While cancelling the Certificate or dealer authorization letter, the holder of the
certificate or letter of authorization may be allowed for a period of thirty days to dispose of
the balance stock of fertilizer, if any held by him.

3. Seizure of stock (Clause 28(1) (d)
         The inspector is empowered to enter upon and search any premises where fertiliser

is manufactured / stored / exhibited for sale and to seize or detain any fertilizer in respect of
which is believe that there is a contravention of FCO 1985. He can also seize the relevant
books of accounts / related documents after giving a due receipt to the owner.

         In case of search and seizure the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (2
of 1974) relating to search and seizure shall, so far as may be applied for search and seizure:
4. Steps involved in the seizure of stock
1. The specific, type, brand, batch and manufacturer's stock which is proposed to be seized is

   to be identified.
2. All the bags should be segregated from the whole stock and kept separate place.

3. Before seizure, the representative sample should be drawn.
4. Carry the seized stock to the safest place or obtained custody bond.
5. If any separate rooms are available in the same premises, keep the seized product in this

   room and cloth covering the lock should be sealed by the Inspector.
6. Seizure notice issued by the Inspector in front of the two independent witnesses signed by

   them and obtain receipt from the dealer.
7. Prepare Mahazar on the spot in the presence of two independent witnesses.
8. After seizure of stock, the information of the seizure is to be communicated to the District

   Collector or his authorized representative within the shortest possible time (usually within
   24 hours) it means without unreasonable delay.

         The Collector may if he thinks fit expedient so to do, direct the essential commodity
to seized to be produced for inspection before him, and if he is satisfied that there has been
a contravention of the order may order confiscation.

         The seized essential commodity is subject to speedy and natural decay or it is
otherwise expedient in the public interest so to do he may-

       (a) Order the same to be sold at the controlled price. If any fixed for essential
       commodity under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force or
       (b) Where no such price is fixed, order the same to be sold by public action.

5. Legal Action
                                                            54
         1. Launching a prosecution directly in a Court (or)

         2. Filing FIR in police station

6. Procedure for launching prosecution:

        Submission of complaint to Designated Court under 12A of ECA 1955 after obtaining
consent order of approval of the competent authority. (12A of ECA).

        However the exact procedure to be adopted by the Fertiliser Inspector will depend
upon the practices prevalent in the State or the enforcing order issued by the State
Government in this behalf.

        All the cases will be tried in summary way.

        All the offences are cognizable

7. For initializing legal action in Court of Law, the following documents are needed:

    1. Copy of Gazette Notification for appointment as Fertiliser Inspector.
    2. Certificate of Registration / Authorization Letter / Certificate of Manufacture.
    3. Invoice for fertilizer purchased by Dealer in respect of which contravention is alleged

        to have been committed.
    4. Form- J duly signed by the Dealer in original
    5. Copy of Form-K
    6. Copy of seizure notice
    7. Bond of custody.
    8. Mahazar / Panchanama.
    9. Copy of intimation sent to District Collector as per Section 6A of ECA 1955.
    10. Copy of Form L
    11. Copy o Show Cause Notice issued to dealer and his reply
    12. Suspension / Cancellation order
    13. Copy of Show Cause Notice issued to distributor / manufacture and their reply
    14. Consent order of competent authority for launching prosecution.
    15. Stock Register and Cash or Credit Memo (Form ­ N & Form ­ M).
    16. Name of the responsible person declared under Clause 24.

5. Penal provisions for violation of FCO 1985:-

    1. 3 months to 7 years imprisonment with or without fine under Section 7(a) (i)(ii) of ECA
        1955

    2. Making any false information is punishable up to 5 years imprisonment under Section
        9.

    3. The Fertiliser stock and its conveyance can be forfeited under Section 7(b)(c).
    4. The FCO offences are treated as cognizable and non-bailable under Section 10 (A).
    5. Minimum imprisonment for subsequent offences ­ 6 months (Habitual offender).

                                                            55
6. Attempt to contravene or abet a contravention is also punishable under Section -8 of
    ECA 1955.

                                                       56
                  FERTILISER (MOVEMENT CONTROL) ORDER 1973

                   (Notification No. SRO 249(E) dated 25.04.1973)

                  Whereas the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary and
         expedient so to do for securing the equitable distribution of fertilisers in the States of
         India. Now in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 3 of the Essential
         Commodities Act 1955, the Central Government makes the Fertiliser (Movement
         Control) order 1973.

Clause -3: Prohibition of export of fertilisers

                  No person shall export or attempt to export or abet the export of any fertilisers
         made allocation by the Government, to any State.

                  Provided that the export of fertilisers under and in accordance with an
         authority to issue permission by the Government of India in the Ministry of Chemical
         and Fertilisers or Director of Agriculture of a State Government or any other officer
         authorized by the State Government in this behalf.

                  Provided further that the export of physical and granulated mixture of
         fertilisers from one State to another shall be subject to an authorization,allowing entry
         of the material in the State to which being exported by the Director of Agriculture.

         The government of India may with a view to securing availability of fertilisers of which
         no allocation is made by the Government, to the farmer in time, order any fertilisers
         manufacturer,Importer,supplier to move and sell the fertiliser produced or imported
         by him such quantities and in such State or States and within such period as may be
         specified.

Clause -3A: The distribution and movement of fertiliser along with the imports of finished
         fertilisers, fertiliser inputs and production of indigenous units shall continue to be
         monitored through online Web Based Fertiliser Monitoring System.

Clause-3B: The department shall continue to draw the supply plan of all the fertilisers
         including phosphatic and potassic in consultation with the manufacturers and
         importers of finished fertilisers and continue to convey the supply plan, agreed upon
         by manufacturers and importers of fertilisers and Department of Fertilisers to the
         respective State Governments on month to month basis.

Clause-3C: Fifty percent of indigenous production of Urea and twenty percent of phosphatic
         and potassic frtilisers produced or imported in India shall be regulated under Clause 6
         of the FCO 1985,FMCO 1973 and ECA 1955.

                                                            57
Clause-4: Powers of entry,search,seizure , etc.,
    (1) Any Fertiliser Inspector appointed under Clause 27 of FCO 1985. Any Police officer not
         below the rank of Head constable may with a view to securing compliance with this
         Order or to satisfy himself that this Order has been complied with
    (a) Stop and search any person, boat, motor or any other vehicle or any receptacle used
         or intended to be used for the export of fertilisers.
    (b) Enter and search any place
    (c) Seize any fertiliser in respect of which he has reason to believe that any provision of
         this Order has been, is being or is about to be contravened alongwith the
         packages,covering or receptacle in which such fertiliser is found or
         animals,vehicles,boats or conveyance used in carrying such fertiliser and thereafter
         take measures necessary for securing the production of the packages, coverings,
         receptacles, animals, vehicles, vessels, boats, or conveyances so seized in a court and
         for their safe custody pending such production.
    (2) The provisions of section 102 and 103 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 relating
         to search and seizure shall, so far as may be, apply to searches and seizures under this
         Clause.

                                                            58
                                                Display Board      Date:....................
                                     Name of the Firm and Address

                                                   Price list
Letter of Authorisation No...............
Date of Validity...................................

Sl.No Name of fertilizer                                           Rate (MRP)

Clause -5:Issue of cash/credit memorandum

         Every dealer shall issue cash or credit memorandums to a purchaser of a fertiliser in
Form M.

                          59
                                                       FORM M
                                      CASH/CREDIT MEMORANDUM
GST/SGST No..............................
Sl.No............................................................ Date........................
Letter of Authorisation No..........................................................................................
Name and address of Firm..........................................................................................
Name and Address of Purchaser.................................................................................

Sl.No Name           of Number of Batch         Quantity Rate                                                         Amount
         Fertiliser
         Brand       and Bags  Number

Total..................
GST/SGST..................
G.Total......................

Signature of Purchaser Signature of Dealer

                                            60
                             STOP SALE NOTICE

         Order under Clause 28 of the Fertiliser (Control) Order 1985 requiring a person not
to dispose of any stock in his possession.

         Whereas I have reason to believe that a contravention of the FCO 1985 has been or
is being or is about to be committed by you in respect of the stock of fertilizer in your
possession as detailed below.

Sl.No         Name of     Batch No. If  Name of        Quantity  Remarks
              Fertiliser  applicable
                                        manufacturer/

                                        importer

1             2           3             4              5         6

         I hereby require you under Clause 28 of the said order to stop the sale, distribution
or use of the said stock for a period of twenty one days from this date.

       Date:

                                                                 Fertiliser Inspector
                                                                 Office seal

                                        61
    PROFORMA OF NOTICE TO BE ISSUED TO DEALER FOR SEIZURE OF FERTILISER STOCK
                                         UNDER CLAUSE 28(1) (d)

No.

Date

                                                    NOTICE

         Whereas I have reason to believe that the stock of fertilizer .................... in your
possession, is being distributed, sold or used in contravention of the clause
................................ of the Fertiliser (Control) Order,1985.

         Under Clause 28(1) (d) of the Fertiliser (Control) Order, I hereby seize the following
stock of fertilizer lying at the premises.......................................................................................

Sl.No     Name of        Batch No. If  Name of                Quantity  Remarks
          Fertiliser     applicable
                                       manufacturer/importer

       1              2  3                      4             5                                                                   6

         You should not sell/dispose off or move the stock from the place where it is stored at
present until further orders.

                                                                           Signature of Fertiliser Inspector

         To
         M/s..........................
         .................................
         Witness: The above seizure notice issued to the Dealer in our presence.

                                                                              1. Signature...........................
                                                                              2. Signature...........................
Signature of Dealer in token
Of receipt of this notice

                                       62
                  PROFORMA FOR BOND FOR CUSTODY OF SEIZED FERTILISERS

         I.........................................(Name),S/o....................................
(Name) resident of..............................................(address) hereby undertake that I shall keep the
fertilizer(s) (whose details are given below), which has been seized by the fertilizer Inspector
Sri...........................From the sale depot/godown of M/s.................................... on ..........(date) in
safe custody and shall produce the fertilizer(s) before the competent authority, when
required, I also undertake to give effect to the further orders of the competent authority as
to the disposal of the same.

DETAILS OF THE FERTILISERS

Sl.No  Name of        Batch No. If  Name of        Quantity    Remarks
       Fertiliser     applicable    manufacturer/           5         6
                                    importer
1      2                      3
                                               4

                                                   Signature of Undertaker

                                    Date:
                                    Place:

Signature of Witness
1.
2.

                                    63
                                        MAHAZAR / PANCHNAMA

         This day , the ..................... At ...................... This mahazar is drawn at the premises of
M/s........................................................................

         Fertilizer dealer situated at ............................................. in the presence of the following
witnesses.

                  1. Sri................................................

                  ....................................................

                  2. Sri................................................

              ................................................

             Sri ................................................... ,Fertiliser Inspector has visited the above said
    fertilizer dealer premises and the above witnesses were summoned by him. The F.I., has
    taken the sample out of stock available with the dealer as per prescribed sampling
    procedure and prepared these test samples out of that, all the three samples were
    packed, labeled and sealed separately by the Fertiliser Inspector. The dealer has also
    affixed his seal on all the samples bags and received one test sample given by the Fertiliser
    Inspector.

             The verification of the stock register in premises showed.................... bags of
    .......................... fertilizer each weighing about 50 Kg. The name of the manufacturer and
    Batch No. mentioned on the bags was as........................................................................

Sri..........................proprietor of the firm, M/s............................. Was present during the entire
Mahazar proceedings.

The Mahazar proceedings were drawn between.........A.M to.... A.M. on the above said date.

                                                                                            Sd...........................

                                                                                          Fertiliser Inspector

                                                                                          Name and Address

1.Sd........................ 2. Sd.................................

Name............... Name...........................

Address............... Address.......................

Date:

       Place:

       64
                                   GOVERNMENT OF _____________
                                 OFFICE OF THE FERTILISER INSPECTOR

                                        ______________________
                                       _______________________
No. ____________Date: _____________
PROFORMA FOR REPORTING THE MATTER OF SEIZURE TO COLLECTOR UNDER CLAUSE (28)
(3)
To
The District Collector
________________
________________
Sub: Seizure of fertiliser stock of M/s. ___________________________
Under Clause (28)(1)(d) of FCO 1985, intimation under Clause (28) (3) of FCO 1985 ­ reg
Sir,
I am the ________________________ (designation) and my office is situated at
______________________________ . By virtue of my office, I am also appointed as Fertiliser
Inspector vide Govt. Notification No. ______
Dtd __________ under Clause 27 of FCO 1985. The objective of the order is to regulate trade,
quality and price of fertilisers and to ensure the supply of standard quality of fertilisers to the
farmers at controlled or reasonable rates.
As per the provisions of FCO 1985, and powers delegated under Clause 28 (1) (d) of the said
order, I, the undersigned inspected the premises of M/s. ______________________________
and found that the said party was selling / manufacturing the fertilisers as detailed below in
contravention of Clause ______. (mention Clause of the FCO 1985) and have the stock of
_____________. (Quantity), fertilisers whose details are mentioned in the seizure notice (a
copy of which is enclosed), has been seized by me on _____ date at ____________ hrs. The
custody of the seized stock has been handed over to Sri. _____________________ for its safe
custody and security. This is being intimated in pursuance of Clause 28 (3) of FCO 1985 for
further necessary action.

                                                                 Signature and seal of fertiliser inspector

                                                            65
                    OFFICE OF THE FERTILISER INSPECTOR

                                                                 Date_______________

NOTICE TO THE DEALER TO FURNISH THE DETAILS OF FERTILISER STOCK AND TO PRODUCE
                                            DOCUMENTS ETC.,

You are hereby informed that the sample was taken by me on _____ from the stock of
fertiliser in your premises, and the same sample had been sent to the fertiliser analyst for
analysis. The fertiliser analyst report No. ___ stating that the fertiliser is non-standard has
been received by me and as per sub-clause (3) of Clause 30 of the said order, a copy of the
said analyst report is herewith sent to you.

Therefore the prosecution is proposed to be launched against you for having sold the non-
standard fertiliser.

For the above reasons you are hereby called upon to produce

(i)    Stock register

(ii)   Bill book from the date of taking sample to till date

(iii)  Invoice for having received the non-standard fertiliser from the manufacturer

(iv)   The details of non-standard fertiliser stock held by you.

(v)    Certificate of stores in respect of non-standard fertiliser

(vi)   Name & address of person (s) responsible for conduct of business of dealer

(vii)  Name & address of person (s) responsible for conduct of business of

       manufacturing unit and officer notified as nodal officer (under Clause 24 of

       FCO 1985)).

       Within ten days from the date of receipt of this notice.

Your attention is drawn to sub-clause (1) and (4) of Clause 28 of the said order, whereby you
are required to comply with my requirements and failing compliance to which you are liable
to be prosecuted, in addition to the offence for having sold the non-standard fertilisers as
stated above.

                                                                            Sd/-

                                                                    Fertiliser Inspector

                                                                    Seal of the Office

To,
M/s. ___________________
_______________________

                                                            66
                                          MODEL CHARGE SHEET
                  IN THE COURT OF THE JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE COURT (PLACE)

                                                        -

                                 CRIMINAL CASE NO. _____________ /
Name:xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
Fertiliser Inspector
(Office Address) - Complainant
V/s,

Accused ______________ 1. Sri.________________
Managing Partner / Proprietor
2. M/s. ________________________
Fertiliser Dealer
3.Sri . _________________________
Managing Director / Partner

4. M/s.____________________________
Manufacturer of Fertiliser
5. Sri. ____________________________
Designated Officer of M/s.

                     COMPLAINT FILED UNDER SECTION ----------------------------

    1. It is submitted that the complainant is working as _____________ (designation /
          address of FI), he has been appointed as FI vide Govt. Notification No. __________
          dtd _________ under Clause 27 of FCO 1985. The official gazette notification of the
          said appointment order is produced herewith and marked as Annexure I.

    2. It is submitted that the first accused is the Managing Partner of M/s.
          _______________________ and he is incharge and responsible for conduct of the
          business of the said firm. The said firm is doing business as a fertiliser dealer and
          holding the dealership Authorisation Letter for selling the fertiliser. The non-
          standard fertiliser in question is sold by the first accused. The said dealers
          authorisation letter is produced herewith and marked as Annexure II.

    3. It is submitted that the second accused is the Managing Director of the Company
          M/s. ___________________ and he is incharge and responsible for the conduct of
          the business of the said company. The said company is manufacturing fertiliser /
          fertiliser mixtures.
                                                            67
4. It is submitted that the third accused has been appointed as responsible officer by
      M/s. _______________ and is responsible for compliance of the provisions of FCO
      1985.

5. It is submitted that during the inspection by the complainant, the first accused / his
      representative was present and the complainant drew the sample of the fertiliser ­
      from the stock of the first accused and from there three test samples were prepared
      as per procedure laid down in Schedule II of FCO. Each test sample was sealed by the
      complainant in presence of the first accused. And one sample was given to the first
      accused alongwith a copy of Form J. Acknowledgement was obtained in Form J as
      per the provisions of Schedule II Part A 5 (iv). The said acknowledgement is herewith
      produced and marked as Annexure IV. The second sample was sent to the Incharge,
      Fertiliser Quality Control Laboratory through Form K marked as Annexure V and the
      3rd sample has been retained / deposited with Senior Officer as reference sample.

6. As per the powers delegated under Clause 28 (2) of FCO 1985, the complainant had
      issued a notice to the dealer M/s. ____________ to prevent the disposal or
      movement of fertiliser. The copy of the same is produced as Annexure VI

7. It is submitted that the stock of non-standard fertiliser has been seized from the
      business premises of the first accused by the complainant on ___________. At the
      time of seizure a Mahazar / Panchnama has been prepared before the witnessess
      and which is marked as Annexure VII. The intimation of the said seizeure has been
      given to the District Collector on _______ which is marked as Annexure VIII.

8. It is submitted as per the report of Incharge, Fertiliser Control Laboratory, the sample
      of fertiliser in question is non-standard. The said report copy has been delivered to
      the first accused and an acknowledgement has been delivered to the first accused
      and an acknowledgement has been obtained. The said acknowledgement is
      produced and marked as Annexure IX.

9. It is submitted that complainant on ___________ has seized the stock register, bill
      book and cash book of the first accused firm under a Mahazar / Panchnama. The said
      Panchnama is produced and marked as Annexure X.

10. It is submitted that the first and second accused were issued the Show Cause notice
      by the complainant. In reply to the said notices the first accused has given a written
      reply stating that the non-standard fertiliser in question was manufactured by
      second accused. The second accused has replied that the non-standard fertiliser in
      question was manufactured by M/s. _________________ The reply of accused
      Number one and second are produced herewith as Marked as Annexure XI and XII.

                                                       68
    11. It is submitted that the first accused has committed an offence under Clause 19 (a)
          read with Section 7 (i)(a)(ii) for having sold the non-standard fertiliser in question.
          The second accused has committed an offence under Clause 19 (a) / (b)* read with
          the Section 7 (i)(a)(ii) for having manufactured the non-standard fertiliser in
          question.
              Strike out whichever is not applicable

    12. The Fertiliser (Control) Order 1985 has been specified as Special Order under Section
          12 (A) of ECA 1955 for the purpose of summary trial.

    13. It is submitted that the Government has accorded consent for launching prosecution
          against the accused, the same has been produced and marked as Annexure XIII.

    14. It is submitted that the offences are committed within the jurisdiction of the Court.

    UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES AND FOR THE PURPOSES OF MEETING THE ENDS OF
    JUSTICE, IT IS HUMBLY PRAYED THAT THIS HONORABLE COURT BE PLEASED TO TAKE
    COGNIZANCE OF THE OFFENCE AGAINST BOTH THE ACCUSED AND PUNISH BOTH OF
    THEM AS PER THE LAWS OF LAND.

    Date:
    Place: Sd._________________
Fertiliser Inspector

List of Witnesses:
1.Sri. _______________ Address:_____________________
Fertiliser Inspector _______________________
2. Sri. _______________ Address:_______________________
3. Sri.________________ Address:_______________________
List of Documents produced

Annexure 1 to 13

                                                            69
                                              EMBLEM
                                             " FORM ` J '
         [ See clause 28 (1) (b), 28 (1)(ba), 28 (1) (bb), 28 (1)(bc) and 28 (1)(bd)
      FORM INDICATING PARTICULARS OF FERTILSERS /ORGANIC FERTILISERS/
                                   BIO-FERTILISERS SAMPLED
(1) Name and address of dealer/manufacturer/importer/Marketer______________
(1A) Letter of authorization Number _______________________________________
(2) Date of sampling ___________________________________________________
(3) Details of markings on the bags from where sample has been taken
    (i) Type and grade of fertiliser _________________________________
    (ii) Name of dealer or manufacturer or importer ______________________
    (iii) Batch No. (if applicable) and date of manufacture or import _________
    (iv) Composition of fertilizer ________________________________________
    (v) The date of expiry of the batch product____________________________
(4) Date of receipt of the stock by the dealer or
    manufacture or importer or pool handling Agency_____________________
(5) Name of the port__________________________________________________
(6) Name of the ship__________________________________________________
(7) Contract number__________________________________________________
(8) Name of the country being imported from_____________________________
(9) Code No. of sample _______________________________________________
(10) Stock position of the lot ___________________________________________
(11)Physical condition of fertiliser ______________________________________
(12)Whether samples drawn from open bags or stitched bags or bulk__________
(13)Name, Address and email Id of Fertiliser Inspector drawing sample________

                                                                    Signature and Metallic Seal
                                                                Impression of Fertiliser Inspector
Receipt of the dealer

Certified that the sample of fertiliser has been drawn in accordance with the procedure laid
down in the Fertiliser (Control) Order, 1985 from the stock in my possession, and I have signed
the test samples at the time of wax sealing. I have also received one test sample out of the
three test samples prepared.

Signature and Seal of Fertiliser Inspector      Signature of dealer /manufacturer

                                                Importer/pool handling agency/
                                                marketer with Address

                                            71
                                                   EMBLEM
                                                  FORM ` K'
                                             [ See clause 30 (1) ]

No..........
    MEMORANDUM TO ACCOMPANY FERTILISER /ORGANIC FERTILISER/BIO-FERTILISER
                                          SAMPLE FOR ANALYSIS

.
From
______________________________
______________________________
To,
_______________________
_______________________
The fertiliser samples as per details given below are sent for analysis:-

    (1) Type of the fertiliser, Grade______________________________________

    (2) Date of sampling ________________________________________________

    (3) Physical condition of fertiliser ______________________________________

    (4) Code number of sample __________________________________________

2. The analysis report may please be forwarded to_____________________________
_____________________________________________________________________
Place:
Date:

                                                                                 Signature and metallic seal
                                                                         Impression of Fertiliser Inspector

                                                            72
                                                   EMBLEM
                                                   FORM `P'
                                           [See Clause 28 (1) (b)]
                                  PARTICULARS OF SAMPLES DRAWN
1. Name and Grade of Fertiliser:____________________________________
2.Composition: ____________________________________
3. Physical Condition of Fertiliser:___________________________________
4.Code No:__________________________________
5.Date of sampling:__________________________________
6. Name& Address of Fertiliser Inspectordrawing
sample:____________________________________________

                                                                        Signature and Metallic Seal
                                                                         Impression of Fertilizer Inspector

                                                            73
Name of the Laboratory equipment and other facilities required for Notified Laboratory

Sl. No                     Name of the equipment

1 Electronic analytical balance

2 Spectrophotometer

3 pH meter

4 Oven

5 Muffle furnace

6 Vacuum pump

7 Water bath cum-shaker

8 Kjeldahl digestion and distillation

9 Magnetic stirrer

10 Vacuum desiccators

11 Indian standard sieves

12 Hot plate

13 Sample grinder

14 All glass water distillation units

15 Top pan balance

16 Deioniser

17 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer(If analyzing micronutrient samples)

                                       74
                                                SCHEDULE ­ I                        1.0
                                                                                    20.50
                                          [See Clause 2(h) & (q)]                   23.0
                                                                                    0.025
                                                   PART - A
                                                                                    0.01
                                    SPECIFICATIONS OF FERTILISERS
                                                                                    1.0
1(a) Straight Nitrogenous fertilizers                                               46.0
                                                                                    1.50
1. Ammonium Sulphate
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                  2.0
          (ii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                      25.0
          (iii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                 2.0
          (iv) Free acidity (as H2SO4) per cent by weight, maximum (0.04 for
                  material obtained from by-product ammonia and by-product
                  gypsum)
          (v) Arsenic (as As2O3) per cent by weight, maximum

2. Urea (46% N)
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum
          (ii) Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum
          (iii) Biuret per cent by weight, maximum
          (iv) Particle size ­ Minimum 80 per cent of the material shall be
                  retained between 1 mm and 2.8 mm IS sieve

3. Ammonium Chloride
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum
          (ii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum
          (iii) Chloride other than ammonium chloride (as NaCl) per cent by
                  weight, maximum

4. Calcium Ammonium Nitrate (25% N)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                      1.0

(ii) Total ammoniacal and nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum 25.0

(iii) Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                          12.5

(iv) Calcium nitrate per cent by weight, maximum                              0.5

(v) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve

75
5.Urea Super Granulated

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                        1.0

(ii) Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum                 46.0

(iii) Biuret per cent by weight, maximum                                        1.5

(iv) Particle size ­ Minimum 80 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 13.2 mm and 9.5 mm IS sieve

5. Urea (Granular)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                 1.0

(ii) Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum 46.0

(iii) Biuret per cent by weight, maximum                                 1.5

(iv) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 4 mm and 2 mm IS sieve

6. Urea Ammonium Nitrate (32% N) (Liquid)                                32.0

          (i) Total nitrogen (Urea, Ammoniacal and Nitrate) per cent by  16.5
                  weight, minimum                                        7.5
                                                                         7.5
          (ii) Urea nitrogen per cent weight, maximum                    1.30-1.35
          (iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight minimum
          (iv) Nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum
          (v) Specific gravity (at 150C)

7. Neem Coated Urea

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                 1.0

(ii) Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum 46.0

(iii) Biuret per cent by weight, maximum                                 1.5

(iv) Neem oil content soluble in Binary mixture of N-Haxen-              0.035
        Acetone (4:1), per cent by weight, minimum

(v) Particle size ­ Minimum 80 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 1 mm and 2.8 mm IS sieve

Foot Note : the Neem oil used for the manufacturing of Neem Coated Urea may be
of the following specifications:-

                         76
Moisture and insoluble matter per cent by weight, maximum          1.0
Specific gravity at 300C                                           0.85 -0.95
Iodine value                                                       65-95
Saponification value                                               160-205
Azadirachtin content, minimum                                      150 ppm

8. Urea Briquettes

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                           1.0

(ii) Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum 46.0

(iii) Biuret per cent by weight, maximum                           1.5

(iv) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 5.7 mm and 3.8 mm IS sieve

9. Sulphur Coated Urea

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                      1.0

(ii) Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum               37.0

(iii) Elemental Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                    17.0

(iv) Biuret per cent by weight, maximum                                       1.5

(v) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 8 mm and 2 mm IS sieve

10. Neem Coated Urea (Granular)                                               1.0
                                                                              46.0
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                            1.5
                                                                              0.035
          (ii) Total nitrogen, per cent by weight (on dry basis), minimum
          (iii) Biuret per cent by weight, maximum
          (iv) Neem oil content soluble in Binary mixture of N-Haxen-Acetone

                  (4:1), per cent by weight, minimum
          (v) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be

                  retained between 2 mm and 4 mm IS sieve

11. Calcium Cyanamide

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                      1.0

(ii) Total nitrogen, per cent by weight , minimum                             19.5

(iii) Cyanamide nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                          15.0

(iv) Nitrate nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum                             1.5

(v) Particle size ­ Not less than 90 per cent of the material shall pass
        through 4 mm IS sieve and be retained 1 mm IS sieve

1(b) Straight Phosphorous fertilizers

1. Single Superphosphate (16% P2O5 Powdered)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                      12.0

(ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum              16.0

(iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 14.5

minimum

                                       77
          (iv) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                  11.0
          (v) Free phosphoric acid (as P2O5) per cent by weight, maximum            4.0

2. Triple Superphosphate                                                            12.0
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                  46.0
          (ii) Total phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum              42.5
          (iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,             3.0
                  minimum
          (iv) Free phosphoric acid (as P2O5) per cent by weight, maximum           18.0

3. Rock Phosphate                                                                   5.0
          (i) Total phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum               16.0
          (ii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall pass       14.5
                  through 0.15 mm IS sieve and the balance 10 per cent of material  11.0
                  shall pass through 0.25 mm IS sieve.                              4.0

4. Single Superphosphate (16% P2O5 Granulated)                                      70.0
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                  19.0
          (ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum          1.0
          (iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,             0.5
                  minimum                                                           1.95-
          (iv) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                  2.00
          (v) Free phosphoric acid (as P2O5) per cent by weight, maximum
          (vi) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
                  retained between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve

5. Superphosphoric Acid (70% P2O5 Liquid)
          (i) Total phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum
          (ii) Polyphosphate (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum
          (iii) Methanol insoluble matter, per cent by weight, maximum
          (iv) Magnesium as MgO per cent by weight, maximum
          (v) Specific gravity (at 240C)

1(c) Straight Potassium Fertilisers

1. Potassium Chloride (Muriate of Potash)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                            0.5

(ii) Water soluble potassium content (as K2O) per cent by weight,                   60.0

minimum

(iii) Sodium (as NaCl) per cent by weight (on dry basis), maximum                   3.5

(iv) Particle size ­ Minimum 65 per cent of the material shall be retained
      between 0.25 mm and 1.7 mm IS sieve

2. Potassium Sulphate

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                            1.5

                                     78
(ii) Water soluble potassium content (as K2O) per cent by weight,            50.0

minimum

(iii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                    17.5

(iv) Sodium as NaCl per cent by weight, maximum                              2.0

(v) Total chloride (as Cl) per cent by weight, maximum                       2.5

3. Potassium Scheonite

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 23.0

(iii) Magnesium oxide (as MgO) per cent by weight, maximum                   11.0

(iv) Sodium (as NaCl) per cent by weight, maximum                            1.5

4. Potassium Chloride (Muriate of Potash) (Granular)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     0.5

(ii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 60.0

(iii) Sodium (as NaCl) per cent by weight, maximum                           3.5

(iv) Magnesium (as MgCl2) per cent by weight, maximum                        1.0

(v) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve

5. Potash Derived from Molasses

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     5.0

(ii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 14.5

6. Dihydrate Poly Halite                                                     1.0
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                           12.5
                                                                             15.0
          (ii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum  5.0
                                                                             17.5
          (iii) Water soluble calcium (as CaO) per cent by weight, minimum   0.0025
                                                                             0.01
          (iv) Water soluble magnesium (as MgO) per cent by weight, Minimum
          (v) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, Minimum            0.50
          (vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                   10.0
          (vii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                  30.0
                                                                             17.0
7. Potassium Magnesium Sulphate (Granular)                                   2.50
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum

          (ii) Magnesium (as MgO) per cent by weight, minimum

          (iii) Potash (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum
          (iv) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, Minimum
          (v) Total Chloride per cent by weight, maximum

                                 79
(vi) Particle Size- 90% of the material shall be retained between 5 mm IS
        sieve and 2 mm IS sieve

1(d) Straight Sulphur Fertilisers

1. Sulphur 90% (Powder)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.0

(ii) Total Elemental Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum              90.0

(Note: The product may contain any inert filler material such as
Bentonite etc. up to the extent of 10 per cent by weight)

2. Sulphur 90% (Granular)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     0.5

(ii) Total elemental sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum              90.0

(iii) Particle size ­ minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve

        (Note : the product may contain inert filler material as Bentonite
        etc. up to the extent of 10 per cent by weight, maximum)

1(e) N.P. Complex Fertilizers

1. Diammonium Phosphate (18:46:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     2.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 18.0

(iii) Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         15.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              46.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  39.5

minimum

(vi) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

2. Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate (16:20:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.0

(ii) Total ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                    16.0

(iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum             20.0

(iv) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 17.0

minimum

(v) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                      13.0

                                   80
(vi) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

3. Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate (20:20:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.0

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical + urea) per cent by weight, minimum 20.0

(iii) Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         18.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              20.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  17.0

minimum

(vi) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                     13.0

(vii) Particle size ­ minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve

4. Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate Nitrate (20:20:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and Nitrate) per cent by weight, 20.0
        minimum

(iii) Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         18.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              20.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  17.0

minimum

(vi) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                     13.0

(vii) Particle size ­ minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve

5. Nitro Phosphate (20:20:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and Nitrate) per cent by weight, 20.0
        minimum

(iii) Nitrogen in ammonical form per cent by weight, minimum                 10.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              20.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  12.0

minimum

(vi) Particle size ­ minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve

6. Urea Ammonium Phosphate (28:28:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

                              81
(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 28.0

(iii) Ammonical Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        9.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum             28.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 24.0

minimum

(vi) Particle size ­ minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve

7. Urea Ammonium Phosphate (24:24:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 24.0

(iii) Ammonical Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        7.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum             24.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 20.5

minimum

(vi) Particle size ­ minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve

8. Urea Ammonium Phosphate (20:20:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 20.0

(iii) Ammonical Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        6.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum             20.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 17.0

minimum

(vi) Particle size ­ minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve

9. Mono Ammonium Phosphate (11:52:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.0

(ii) Total nitrogen all in ammoniacal form per cent by weight, minimum 11.0

(iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum           52.0

(iv) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 44.5

(v) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shallbe retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve

10. Ammonium Nitrate Phosphate (23:23:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.5

         82
(ii) Total nitrogen (Ammoniacal and Nitrate) per cent by weight, 23.0
        minimum

(iii) Nitrogen in ammoniacal form per cent by weight, minimum                13.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum             23.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorus (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 20.0

(vi) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

11. Ammonium Poly Phosphate (10:34:0) (Liquid)

          (i) Total nitrogen (all as ammoniacal nitrogen) per cent by weight, 10.0
                  minimum

(ii) Total Phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                 34.0

(iii) Poly-phosphorus (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                  22.0

(iv) Specific gravity (at 27oC)                                              1.2-

                                                                             1.6

(v) pH(5% solution)                                                          5.8-

                                                                             6.2

12. Ammonium Phosphate (14:28:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and Urea) per cent by weight, minimum 14.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        8.0

(iv) Available phosphorus (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum              28.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorus (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 24.0

(vi) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

13. NPK 13:33:0:15 S

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.0

(ii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         13.0

(iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            33.0

(iv) Water soluble phosphorus (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 28.5

(v) Total elemental + sulphate sulphur (as S), per cent by weight, 15.0
        minimum

(vi) Sulphate sulphur (as S), per cent by weight, minimum                    7.5

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve

14. Nitro Phosphate (24:24:0)

                                  83
(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and nitrate) per cent by weight,              24.0

minimum

(iii) Nitrogen in ammoniacal form per cent by weight, minimum                13.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum             24.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 20.5

(vi) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve

15. Neem Coated Urea Ammonium Phosphate (28:28:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and Urea) per cent by weight, minimum 28.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        9.0

(iv) Available phosphorus (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum              28.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorus (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 24.0

(vi) Neem oil content soluble in Benzene per cent by weight, minimum 0.035

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

1(f) N.P.K. Complex Fertilisers

1. Nitrophosphate with Potash (15:15:15)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and nitrate) per cent by weight,              15.0

minimum

(iii) Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         7.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              15.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  4.0

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 15.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

2. N.P.K. (10:26:26)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 10.0

(iii) Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         7.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              26.0

                                 84
(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  22.5

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 26.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

3. N.P.K. (12:32:16)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 12.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        9.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              32.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  27.5

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 16.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

4. N.P.K. (22:22:11)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 22.0

(iii) Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         7.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              22.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  19.0

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 11.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

5. N.P.K. (14:35:14)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Nitrogen in ammoniacal form per cent by weight, minimum                 14.0

(iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum             35.0

(iv) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 30.0

minimum

(v) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 14.0

                      85
(vi) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

6. N.P.K. (17:17:17)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 17.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        5.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              17.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  14.5

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 17.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

7. N.P.K. (14:28:14)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 14.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        8.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              28.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  24.0

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 14.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

8. N.P.K. (19:19:19)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 19.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        5.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              19.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  16.5

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 19.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

9. N.P.K. (17:17:17)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

                      86
(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and nitrate) per cent by weight,              17.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        8.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              17.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  13.5

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 17.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

10. N.P.K. (20:10:10)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 20.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        4.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              10.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  8.5

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 10.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

11. N.P.K. (15:15:15)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 15.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        12.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              15.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                  13.0

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 15.0

(vii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

12. N.P.K. (15:15:15:9(S)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammonical and urea) per cent by weight, minimum 15.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        12.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum              15.0

                           87
(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                   13.0

minimum

(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 15.0

(vii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                     9.0

(viii) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

13. N.P.K. (12:11:18)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                      1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and nitrate) per cent by weight,              12.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         7.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum              11.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                   8.0

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 18.0

(vii) Magnesium per cent by weight, minimum                                   1.0

(viii) Sulphate sulphur (as S) per cent by weight minimum                     7.5

(ix) Total chlorides (as Cl) per cent by weight, maximum                      1.0

(x) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

14. N.P.K. (16:16:16)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                      1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and nitrate) per cent by weight,              16.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         8.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum              16.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                   12.0

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 16.0

(vii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

15. N.P.K. (9:25:25)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                      1.5

                       88
(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and Nitrate) per cent by weight,           9.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                      6.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum           25.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                21.5

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 25.0

(vii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall beretained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

16. Nitrophosphate with Potash (14:14:21)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                   1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and nitrate) per cent by weight,           14.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                      8.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum           14.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                9.0

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 21.0

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

17. Nitrophosphate with Potash (21:06:13)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                   1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and nitrate) per cent by weight,           21.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                      10.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum           6.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                4.0

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 13.0

(vii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

18. Nitrophosphate with Potash Grade II (15:15:15)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                   1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and nitrate) per cent by weight,           15.0

minimum

         89
(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                     8.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum          15.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,               10.0

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 15.0

(vii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                 3.5

(viii) Total chloride (as Cl) per cent by weight, maximum                 3.5

(ix) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

19. Nitrophosphate with Potash Grade II (15:9:20)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                  1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and nitrate) per cent by weight,          15.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                     8.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 9.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,               6.0

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 20.0

(vii) SulphateSulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                  3.5

(viii) Magnesium (as Mg) per cent by weight, minimum                      0.5

(ix) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

20.NPK (14:7:14)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                  2.0

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and nitrate) per cent by weight,          14.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                     8.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum          7.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,               5.6

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum         14.0

(vii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be between
       1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

21.Urea Single Super Phosphate Complex Fertilizer

                  90
(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                  3.0

(ii) Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                           5.0

(iii) Urea nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum                           4.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum          15.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,               12.50
       Minimum

(vi) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                  10.0

(vii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be between
       1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

1(g) Micronutrients

1. Zinc Sulphate Heptahydrate (ZnSO47H2O)                                 1.0
          (i) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum       21.0
          (ii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                   10.0
          (iii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum       4.0
          (iv) pH (5% solution) not less than                             0.003
          (v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                    0.0025
          (vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                0.01
          (vii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum

2. Manganese Sulphate                                                     30.5
          (i) Manganese (as Mn) content per cent by weight, minimum       17.0
          (ii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum        1.0
          (iii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum     4.0
          (iv) pH (5% solution)not less than                              0.003
          (v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                    0.0025
          (vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                0.01
          (vii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum

3. Borax (Sodium Tetraborate) (Na2B4O7.10H2O) for soil application        10.5
          (i) Content of boron as (B) per cent by weight, minimum         1.0
          (ii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum      9.0-9.5
          (iii) pH (3.8% solution)                                        0.003
          (iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                   0.0025
          (v) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                 0.01
          (vi) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum

                     91
4. Copper Sulphate (CuSO4.5H2O)                                          24.0
          (i) Copper (as Cu) per cent by weight, minimum                 12.0
          (ii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum       1.0
          (iii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum    3.0
          (iv) pH (5% solution) not less than                            0.003
          (v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                   0.0025
          (vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum               0.01
          (vii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum
                                                                         19.0
5. Ferrous Sulphate (FeSO4.7H2O)                                         10.5
          (i) Ferrous iron (as Fe) per cent by weight, minimum           1.0
          (ii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) percent by weight, minimum        1.0
          (iii) Free acid (as H2SO4) per cent by weight, maximum         3.5
          (iv) Matter insoluble in water, per cent by weight, maximum    0.003
          (v) pH(5% solution) not less than                              0.0025
          (vi) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                  0.01
          (vii) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum
          (viii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum             52.0
                                                                         1.0
6. Ammonium Molybdate (NH4)6Mo7O24.4H2O)                                 0.003
          (i) Molybdenum (as Mo) per cent by weight, minimum             0.0025
          (ii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum     0.01
          (iii) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum
          (iv) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum
          (v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum

7. Chelated Zinc as Zn-EDTA
          (i) Appearance ­ Free flowing crystalline or powder or Tablet

(ii) Zinc content (Expressed as Zn), per cent by weight minimum in the 12.0
      form of Zn-EDTA

(iii) pH (5% solution)                                                   6.0-6.5

(iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                            0.003

(v) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                          0.0025
(vi) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                         0.01

8. Chelated Iron as Fe-EDTA

                             92
(i) Appearance ­ Free flowing crystalline / powder

(ii) Iron content (expressed as Fe), per cent by weight minimum in the 12.0
        form of Fe-EDTA

(iii) pH (5% solution)                                                5.5-6.5

(iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                         0.003

(v) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                       0.0025

(vi) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                      0.01

9. Zinc Sulphate Mono Hydrate (ZnSO4.H2O)                             1.0
          (i) Free flowing powder form                                33.0
          (ii) Matter-insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum  15.0
          (iii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight. minimum              1.0
          (iv) SulphateSulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum     4.0
          (v) Iron (as Fe) per cent by weight, maximum                0.0025
          (vi) pH not less than                                       0.01
          (vii) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum
          (viii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum

10. Magnesium Sulphate

(i) Magnesium (as Mg) per cent by weight, minimum                     9.5

(ii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum              12.0

(iii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum           1.0

(iv) pH (5% solution)                                                 5.0-8.0
(v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                          0.003
(vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                      0.0025
(vii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                     0.01

11. Boric Acid (H3BO3)                                                17.0
          (i) Boron (as B) per cent weight, minimum                   1.0
          (ii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum  0.003
          (iii) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum              0.0025
          (iv) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum            0.01
          (v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum

12. Di Sodium Octa Borate Tetra Hydrate (Na2B8O13.4H2O)

(i) Boron (as B) per cent weight, minimum                             20.0

(ii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum            1.0

                        93
(iii) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                           0.003

(iv) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                         0.0025
(v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                          0.01

13. Di Sodium Tetra Borate Penta Hydrate (Granular)                      14.5
          (i) Boron (as B) per cent weight, minimum                      1.0
          (ii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum     0.003
          (iii) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                 0.0025
          (iv) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum               0.01
          (v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum

(v) Particle size ­ Minimum 90% of the material shall be retained
        between 1.4 mm and 5 mm IS sieve.

14. Zinc Sulphate Mono Hydrate (Granular)

(i) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                             33.0

(ii) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                 15.0

(iii) Iron (as Fe) per cent by weight, maximum                           1.0

(iv) Matter-insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum               1.0

(v) pH (5% solution) not less than                                       4.0
(vi) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                            0.003
(vii) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                        0.0025
(viii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                       0.01

(ix) Particle size ­ Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall retained
        between 4 mm and 2 mm IS sieve.

15. Zinc Oxide Suspension Concentrate (39.5% Zn)                      39.5
          (i) Dense suspension concentrate of liquid Zn               9.0±1
          (ii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum               0.01
          (iii) pH (5% Solution)                                      0.003
          (iv) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum            0.0025
          (v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                1.71-1.75
          (vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum
          (vii) Specific gravity

16. Di-sodium Tetra Borate Penta Hydrate

94
(i) Appearance                                                                 Free flowing
                                                                               crystalline
(ii) Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum                                  14.5
(iii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum                    1.0
(iv) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                               0.001
(v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                                   0.001
(vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                               0.0025

17. Anhydrous Borax (Na2B4O7)                                          20.5
          (i) Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum                 1.0
          (ii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum   0.001
          (iii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum            0.001
          (iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                Free flowing
          (v) Appearance                                               form

18. Concentrated Liquid Calcium 11%                                   11.0
          (i) Calcium (as Ca) per cent by weight, minimum             9.5±1.0
          (ii) pH                                                     1.3-1.4
          (iii) Specific gravity (kg/l)

19. Zinc Polyphosphate                                                 Free flowing
          (i) Appearance                                               16.0
          (ii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                15.0
          (iii) DTPA soluble Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum  1.0
          (iv) Water Soluble Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, maximum  9.0
          (v) Magnesium (as Mg) per cent by weight, maximum            0.003
          (vi) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                0.0025
          (vii) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum            0.01
          (viii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum

20. Chelated Zinc as Zn-HEDP                                                   Free flowing
          (i) Appearance                                                       crystalline

(ii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum in the form of Zn-HEDP, 17.0
        minimum

(iii) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                                 0.003

                              95
(iv) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                                   0.0025
(v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                                    0.01

21. Chelated Iron as Fe-HEDP                                                Free            flowing
          (i) Appearance                                                    crystalline

(ii) Iron (as Fe) per cent by weight, minimum in the form of Fe- 17.0
      HEDP, minimum

(iii) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                              0.003

(iv) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                            0.0025

(v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                             0.01

22. Colemanite                                               11.0
          (i) Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum       0.5
          (ii) Sodium (as NaCl) per cent by weight, maximum  6.50
          (iii) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum         0.003
          (iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum      0.01
          (v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum    0.0025
          (v) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum

23. Boron Ethanolamine                                                      10.0
          (i) Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum                      8.5±1
          (ii) pH                                                           1.3-1.4
          (iii) Specific gravity                                            0.003
          (iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                     0.01
          (v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                   0.0025
          (vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum

24. Magnesium Hydroxide and Zinc Phosphate                                           24.0
          (i) Magnesium as Mg per cent by weight, minimum                            10.0
          (ii) Zinc as Zn per cent by weight, minimum                                8.5±1
          (iii) pH (50 g/L)                                                          2.5
          (iv) Available Phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum

25. Manganese Carbonate suspension concentrate:-

(i) Manganese per cent by weight, minimum                                            26.0
(ii) pH                                                                              9±1
(iii) Specific Gravity                                                               1.8-1.9

                              96
(iv) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum   0.001
(v) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum    0.0025

26. Chelated Calcium as Ca-EDTA:-

(i) Appearance- Free flowing powder

(ii) Calcium Content (expressed as Ca) % Weight Min in the form of Ca 9.0
        ­ EDTA

(iii) pH (5% Solution)                             6.0-7.0

(iv) Matter insoluble in water %by weight Max      0.5

(v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum       0.003

(vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum   0.0025

(vii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum  0.01

27. Chelated Magnesium as Mg-EDTA:-

(i) Appearance- Free flowing powder

(ii) Magnesium Content (expressed as Mg) % Weight Min in the form 5.0
        of Mg ­ EDTA

(iii) pH (5% Solution)                             6.0-7.0

(iv) Matter insoluble in water %by weight Max      0.5

(v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum       0.003
(vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum   0.0025
(vii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum  0.01

28. Chelated Manganese as Mn-EDTA:-

(i) Appearance- Free flowing powder

(ii) Manganese Content (expressed as Mn) % Weight Min in the form 10.0
        of Mn­ EDTA

(iii) pH (5% Solution)                             6.0-7.0
(iv) Matter insoluble in water %by weight Max      0.5
(v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum       0.003
(vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum   0.0025

(vii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum  0.01

29. Chelated Copper as Cu-EDTA:-

(i) Appearance- Free flowing powder

                                   97
(ii) Copper Content (expressed as Cu) % Weight Min in the form of Cu 12.0
        ­ EDTA

(iii) pH (5% Solution)                                                      5.5-6.5

(iv) Matter insoluble in water %by weight Max                               0.5

(v) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                                0.003

(vi) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                            0.0025

(vii) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                           0.01

1(h) Fortified Fertilisers

1. Boronated Single Superphosphate (16% P2O5 Powered)

(i) Moisture per cent. by weight, maximum                                   12.0

(ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum             16.0

(iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 14.5

(iv) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                    11.0

(v) Boron (as B) per cent by weight                                         0.2-

                                                                            0.3

(vi) Free phosphoric acid (as P2O5) per cent by weight, maximum             4.0

2. Zincated Urea

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.0

(ii) Total nitrogen(in Urea form) per cent by weight, minimum               43.0

(iii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                              2.0

(iv) Biuret, per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.5

(v) Particle Size ­ Minimum 80 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 1 mm and 2.8 mm IS sieve.

3. Zincated Phosphate (Suspension) ­ for seed treatment                     14.0
          (i) Total Phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum       3.0
          (ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum  17.5
          (iii) Total zinc (Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                 0.003
          (iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                     8+1
          (v) pH (5% solution)

4. Boronated NPK Complex (10:26:26)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.50

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and urea) per cent by weight,               10.0

minimum

                            98
(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                       7.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            26.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 22.5

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 26.0

(vii) Boron (as B) per cent by weight                                       0.2-

                                                                            0.3

(viii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

5. Boronated NPK Complex (12:32:16)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.50

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and urea) per cent by weight,               12.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                       9.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            32.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 27.5

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 16.0

(vii) Boron (as B) per cent by weight                                       0.2-

                                                                            0.3

(viii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

6. Boronated Diammonium Phosphate (18:46:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    2.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and urea) per cent by weight,               18.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                       15.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            46.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 41.0

Minimum

(vi) Boron (as B) per cent by weight                                        0.2-

                                                                            0.3

(vii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

7. Zincated NPK (10:26:26)

                            99
(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and urea) per cent by weight,               10.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                       7.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 26.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 22.5

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, Minimum 26.0

(vii) Zinc(Zn) per cent by weight, Minimum                                  0.50

(viii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

8. Zincated NPK (12:32:16)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and urea) per cent by weight,               12.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                       9.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            32.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 27.5

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, Minimum 16.0

(vii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                              0.50

(viii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

9. Boronated Calcium Nitrate

          (i) Total nitrogen(ammonical and nitrate N)per cent by weight, 14.5
                  minimum

(ii) Nitrate nitrogen as N per cent by weight, minimum                      13.5

(iii) Water soluble calcium as per cent by weight, minimum                  17.0

(iv) Boron (as B) per cent by weight                                        0.2-

                                                                            0.3

10.Boronated Nitrophosphate with Potash (15:15:15)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.5

                            100
(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and Nitrate N) per cent by weight,          15.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                       7.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            15.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 4.0

Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 15.0

(vii) Boron (as B) per cent by weight,                                      0.2-

                                                                            0.3

(viii) Particle size-Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

11. Zincated DAP (18:46:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    2.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and urea) per cent by weight,               18.0

minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                       15.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            46.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 39.5

Minimum

(vi) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                               0.5

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

12. Zincated SSP (16% P2O5)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    12.0

(ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            16.0

(iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 14.5

(iv) SulphateSulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                     11.0

(v) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                                0.5

(vi) Free phosphoric acid (as P2O5) per cent by weight, maximum             4.0

12. Boronated NPK Complex (24:24:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (ammoniacal and Nitrate) per cent by weight,            24.0

Minimum

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                       13.5

                                     101
(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            24.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,                 20.5

Minimum

(vi) Boron as B per cent by weight                                          0.2-

                                                                            0.3

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be
        retained between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

13. Boronated Single Super Phosphate (16% P2O5 Granular)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    5.0

(ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            16.0

(iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,               14.5

Minimum

(iv) SulphateSulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                     11.0

(v) Boron (as B) per cent by weight,                                        0.2-

                                                                            0.3

(vi) Free phosphoric acid (as P2O5) per cent by weight, maximum             4.0

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

14. Zincated Bentonite Sulphur

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                    1.0

(ii) Elemental Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                   65.0

(iii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                              18.0

(iv) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

15. Zincated Urea Ammonium Phsphate (28:28:0)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                          1.5

(ii) Total nitrogen, per cent by weight, Minimum                                  28.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                             9.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                  28.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum               25.2

(vi) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight , minimum                                    0.5

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

16. Zincated NPK 14:35:14

                                102
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     1.5
          (ii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                         14.0
          (iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            35.0
          (iv) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum         29.0
          (v) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O), per cent by weight, minimum            14.0
          (vi) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight , minimum                               0.5
          (vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
                                                                                         1.5
                  between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.                                        20.0
                                                                                         18.0
17. Zincated Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate (20:20:0:13)                                    20.0
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                       17.0
          (ii) Total Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                                13.0
          (iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                          0.5
          (iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum
          (v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum            1.5
          (vi) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                       24.0
          (vii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight , minimum                                7.5
          (viii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained    16.5
                  between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.                                        24.0
                                                                                         20.0
18. NP 24:24:0 fortified with Sulphur                                                    8.0
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                       4.0
          (ii) Total Nitrogen (Ammoniacal and Urea) per cent by weight, minimum          4.0
          (iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum
          (iv) Nitrogen in the form of Urea, maximum                                     1.5
          (v) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                20.0
          (vi) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum
          (vii) Total Sulphur per cent by weight, minimum
          (viii) Elemental Sulphur per cent by weight , minimum
          (ix) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum
          (x) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
                  between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

19. Boronated Ammonium Phosphate Sulphate
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum
          (ii) Total Nitrogen (Ammoniacal and Urea) per cent by weight, minimum

103
          (iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        18.0
          (iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum             20.0
          (v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum          17.0
          (vi) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                     13.0
          (vii) Boron (as B) per cent by weight                                        0.2-
                                                                                       0.3
          (viii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
                  between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.                                      1.0
                                                                                       14.0
20. NPK 14:35:14 fortified with Zinc and Boron                                         35.0
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     29.0
          (ii) Nitrogen in ammoniacal form per cent by weight, minimum                 14.0
          (iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum            0.50
          (iv) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum         0.30
          (v) Water Soluble Potash (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum
          (vi) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                                5.0
          (vii) Boron (as B) per cent by weight                                        16.0
          (viii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained  14.50
                  between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.                                      0.50
                                                                                       0.20
21. SSP Fortified with Zinc and Boron (Granular)                                       4.0
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     11.0
          (ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum
          (iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum        0.50
          (iv) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                                80.0
          (v) Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum                                 1.20
          (vi) Free Phosphoric Acid (as P2O5) per cent by weight, maximum
          (vii) Sulphate Sulpher (as S) per cent by weight, minimum
          (viii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
                  between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

22. Boronated Sulphur (Granular)
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum
          (ii) Total Elemental Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum
          (iii) Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum

104
(iv) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

        (Note: the product may contain inert filler material as Bentonite etc. up to
        the extent of 14 per cent by weight, maximum)

23. Urea Ammonium Phosphate (20:20:0 fortified with 13% Sulphur)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                              1.5

(ii) Total Nitrogen (Ammoniacal and Urea) per cent by weight, minimum                 20.0

(iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                     20.0

(iv) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum                  17.0

(v) Elemental Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                              6.5

(vi) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                              6.5

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

24. Zincated SSP (Granular)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                              5.0

(ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                      16.0

(iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum                 14.5

(iv) Free phosphoric acid (as P2O5) per cent by weight, maximum                       4.0

(v) SulphateSulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                                11.0

(vi) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                                         0.50

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 4 mm and 1 mm IS sieve.

25. Elemental Sulphur fortified with Zinc Oxide in microgranule form

(i) Elemental Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                              67.0

(ii) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum                                         14.0

(iii) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                            2.0

(iv) Particle Size : 80 per cent of the material retain on 0.149 mm IS sieve          4.0

26. NPK 8:21:21 fortified with Mg, S, Zn and B

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                              1.5

(ii) Total Nitrogen (ammoniacal and urea) per cent by weight, minimum                 8.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                                 5.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                      21.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum                   18.0

                             105
(vi) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum                  21.0

(vii) Magnesium (as Mg) per cent by weight , minimum                               1.20

(viii) Total Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                            2.0

(ix) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight , minimum                                     1.0

(x) Boron (as B) per cent by weight,                                               0.2-

                                                                                   0.3

(xi) Particle size- Not less than 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

27. Diammonium Phosphate fortified with 4% Sulphur

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                           2.5

(ii) Total Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                                    18.0

(iii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                              15.5

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                   46.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum                41.0

(vi) Total Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                              4.0

(vii) Elemental Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                         3.0

(viii) Particle size- Not less than 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

28. NPK 9:24:24 fortified with Mg, S, Zn and B

(i) Total Nitrogen (ammoniacal and urea) per cent by weight, minimum               9.0

(ii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                               6.3

(iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                  24.0

(iv) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum               20.5

(v) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum                   24.0

(vi) Magnesium (as Mg) per cent by weight , minimum                                0.30

(vii) Total Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                             2.1

(viii) Total Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight , minimum                             0.6

(ix) Total Boron (as B) per cent by weight,                                        0.2-

                                                                                   0.3

(x) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                           1.3

(xi) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

29. Boronated NP 28:28:0

                          106
(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                                  1.5

(ii) Total N (ammoniacal and Nitrate) per cent by weight, minimum                         28.0

(iii) Ammoniacal N per cent by weight, minimum                                            9.0

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                          28.0

(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum                       24.0

(vi) Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum                                             0.2

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

30. NPK 11:30:14 fortified with Magnesium, Sulphur, Zinc and Boron

(i) Moisture per cent by weight maximum                                          1.50

(ii) Total nitrogen (Ammonical + urea) per cent by weight, minimum 11.0

(iii) Ammonical Nitrogen percent by weight                                       8.20

(iv) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum                 30.0
                                                                                 25.50
(v) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight,
        Minimum

(vi) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 14.0

(vii) Zinc (as Zn) percent by weight, minimum                                    1.0

(viii) Total sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                          1.2

(ix) Total Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum                              0.2-0.3
(x) Total Magnesium (as Mg) per cent by weight, minimum                          0.40

(xi) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

31. SSP fortified with Magnesium Zinc and Boron (Granular)                       5.0
          (i) Moisture per cent by weight maximum                                16.0
          (ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum       14.50
          (iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum  0.50
          (iv) Magnesium (as Mg) per cent by weight, minimum                     0.50
          (v) Zinc (as Zn) percent by weight, minimum                            0.20
          (vi) Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum                          11.0
          (vii) Sulphate sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum              4.0
          (viii) Free phosphoric acid (as P2O5) percent by weight maximum

107
(ix) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve.

32. APS (16:20:0) Fortified with Magnesium

(i) Moisture per cent by weight maximum                                       1.0

(ii) Ammonical nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                           16.0

(iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum             20.0

(iv) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum 17.0

(v) Sulphate sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                       13.0

(vi) Magnesium (as Mg) per cent by weight, minimum                            0.60

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve

34.Potash fortified with Silicon

(i) Colour                                                             White

(ii) pH (1%)                                                           8-10

(iii) Bulk density                                                     1.012 g/cc

(iv) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 18.0

(v) Total Si(OH)4 percent by weight, minimum                           12.0

35.Single Super Phosphate fortified with Zinc, Iron and Boron

(i) Moisture per cent by weight maximum                                       5.0

(ii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum              16.0

(iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, Minimum 14.5

(iv) Iron (as Fe)% by weight minimum                                          0.25

(v) Zinc (as Zn)% by weight minimum                                           0.5

(vi) Free Phosphoric Acid (as P2O5)% by weight max                            4.0

(vi) Sulphate sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                      11.0

(vii) Particle size- Minimum 90 per cent of the material shall be retained
        between 1 mm and 4 mm IS sieve

1(i) 100% Water Soluble Complex Fertilisers

1. Potassium Nitrate (13:0:45)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight maximum                                       0.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (all in Nitrate form) per cent by weight, minimum         13.0

(iii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum            45.0

                                  108
(iv) Sodium (as Na) per cent by weight, maximum                     1.0

(v) Total chloride(as Cl) per cent by weight,maximum                1.5

(vi) Matter insoluble in water, per cent by weight, maximum         0.50

2. Mono Potassium Phosphate (0.52:34) (100% Water Soluble)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight maximum                             0.5

(ii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 52.0

(iii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum  34.0

(iv) Sodium (as NaCl) per cent by weight, maximum                   0.5

3. Calcium Nitrate

          (i) Total nitrogen (Ammonical and Nitrate form) per centby weight, 15.5
                  minimum

(ii) Nitrate nitrogen as N per cent by weight, minimum              14.5

(iii) Water soluble calcium as per cent by weight, minimum          18.8

(iv) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum          1.5

4. Potassium Magnesium Sulphate

(i) Moisture per cent by weight maximum                             0.5

(ii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum   22.0

(iii) Magnesium as MgO per cent by weight, minimum                  18.0

(iv) Total chloride(as Cl) per cent by weight,maximum               2.5

(v) Sodium (as NaCl), per cent by weight, maximum                   2.0

(vi) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum            20.0

5. Mono Ammonium Phosphate (12:61:0) (100% Water Soluble)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                            0.5

(ii) Ammoniacal nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                12.0

(iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 61.0

(iv) Sodium as NaCl per cent by weight, maximum                     0.5

(v) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight,maximum            0.5

6. Urea Phosphate (17:44:0) (100% Water Soluble)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                            0.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (all in urea form) per cent by weight, minimum  17.0

(iii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 44.0

(iv) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum          0.5

                                 109
7. Potassium Nitrate (Prilled) (13:0:45) (Soil application)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     0.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (all in Nitrate form) per cent by weight, minimum        13.0

(iii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O)) per cent by weight, minimum          45.0

(iv) Sodium (as Na) per cent by weight, maximum                              1.0

(v) Total chloride (as Cl) per cent by weight, maximum                       1.5

(vi) Matter insoluble in water, per cent by weight, maximum                  1.5

(vii) Particle size ­ 80 per cent of the material shall be retained between
        1 mm and 2.8 mm IS sieve

8. 24:24:0 (100% Water Soluble Complex Fertiliser)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                     0.5

(ii) Total nitrogen (Ammonical and Nitrate) per cent by weight, minimum 24.0

(iii) Ammoniacal Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        14.0

(iv) Nitrate Nitrogen per cent by weight , minimum                           10.0

(v) Water Soluble Phosphorous per cent by weight, minimum                    24.0

(vi) Matter insoluble in water, per cent by weight, maximum                  0.5

9. POTASSIUM METAPHOSPHATE DIMER (0:40:40)

(i) Moisture per cent by weight maximum                                      0.50

(ii) Water soluble phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum 40.0

(iii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 40.0

(iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum                                0.003

(v) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                              0.0025

(vi) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                             0.10

1(j) Beneficial Element Fertiliser

1. Ortho Silicic Acid (OSA) 2.0% WSL

(i) Ortho Silicic {Si(OH)4} per cent by weight, minimum                2.0

Plant available Silicon (Si) equivalent per cent by weight, minimum 0.60

(ii) Omitted

(iii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum            0.50

(iv) Specific Gravity (g/ml)                                           1.07-
                                                                       1.15
(v) Sodium (as Na) per cent by weight, maximum
(vi) Total Chloride (as Cl) per cent by weight, maximum                0.10

                                                                       4.0

                                    110
2. Diatomite Silicon

(i) Moisture per cent by weight, maximum                                      12.0

(ii) pH minimum                                                               7.5

(iii) Plant available Silicon Si(OH)4 per cent by weight, minimum             0.08
(iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight maximum                                  0.003
(v) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum                               0.0025

(vi) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum                              0.01

(vii) Particle Size : Not less than 80 per cent of the material shall retain
        between 6mm and 2 mm IS sieve

3. Sodium Silicate (Liquid)

(i) Silicon as SiO2 per cent by weight, minimum                               23.8

(ii) Sodium (as Na) per cent by weight, maximum                               6.0

(iii) Specific gravity                                                        1.3-1.4

4. Orthosilicic Acid (19%) (liquid)

(i) Orthocilicic acid as Si(OH)4 per cent by weight, minimum                  18.0

(ii) Water soluble potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum 3.0

(iii) Matter insoluble in water per cent by weight, maximum                   0.40

(iv) pH                                                                       10.5-11.5

(v) Specific gravity                                                          1.1

1 (k) Liquid Fertilizer

1. NPK 8:8:8 (liquid) (for Sugarcane crop)

          (i) Total nitrogen (ammonical+ Nitrate form) per cent by weight, 8.0
                  minimum

(ii) Nitrogen in ammonical form per cent by weight, minimum                        3.0

(iii) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum                   8.0

(iv) Water soluble potash (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum                     8.0

(v) Sulphate Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum                            2.0

(vi) Water Soluble Chlorine (as Cl) per cent by weight, max.                       0.50

(vii) pH of 1 per cent solution                                                    3.5+0.5

                                     111
(viii) Insoluble particle will not exceed 0.1 per cent by weight when
        filtered on muslin cloth

(ix) Specific gravity                                                           1.35

2. Calcium Di Hydrogen Phosphate (liquid)                                 22.0
          (i) Available phosphorous (as P2O5)per cent by weight, minimum  1.1±1
          (ii) pH                                                         1.25-1.35
          (iii) Sp gravity (kg/l)

3. Chelated Zinc as Zinc-Glycine (liquid)                 6.80
          (i) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight minimum     4.0-5.5
          (ii) pH (1 per cent Distilled water)            1.21-1.28
          (iii) Sp gravity (kg/l)

4. Chelated Calcium as Calcium Glycine (liquid)                                 6.00
          (i) Calcium (as Ca) per cent by weight minimum
          (ii) pH (1 per cent Distilled water)                                  5.5-7.0
          (iii) Sp gravity (kg/l)
                                                                                1.15-
                                                                                1.22

5. Chelated Boron as Boron-Glycine (liquid)                                     5.0
          (i) Boron (as B) per cent by weight minimum                           8.0-9.0
          (ii) pH (1 per cent Distilled water)                                  1.10-1.23
          (iii) Sp gravity (kg/ml)

6. NK 6:0:18 Fortified with Calcium, Magnesium & Boron (suspension)                   6.0
          (i) Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                              5.8
          (ii) Nitrate Nitrogen as N per cent by weight, minimum                      18.0
          (iii) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum          5.0
          (iv) Water Soluble Calcium (as CaO) per cent by weight, minimum             2.0
          (v) Water soluble Magnesium (as MgO) per cent by weight, minimum            0.5-0.8
          (vi) Boron as B per cent by weight                                          8 to 9
          (vii) pH (1% Solution) at 200C
                                                                                      11.0
7. NK 11:11:8 Fortified with Zinc & Boron (suspension)                                7.2
          (i) Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                              3.0
          (ii) Urea Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                              11.0
          (iii) Ammoniacal Nitrogen per cent by weight, maximum
          (iv) Water soluble Phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum

                       112
(v) Water Soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by weight, minimum                8.0
(vi) Zinc as Zn per cent by weight, minimum in the form of Zn-EDTA              0.7
(vii) Boron as B per cent by weight                                             0.5-0.7
(viii) pH (1% soluble) at 200C                                                  7.0-8.0

8. Calcium Nitrate Fortified with Magnesium (Suspension)                        10.0
          (i) Total nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                        8.5
          (ii) Nitrate Nitrogen per cent by weight, minimum                     15.0
          (iii) Water Soluble calcium as CaO, per cent by weight, minimum       2.0
          (iv) Water soluble magnesium as MgO, per cent by weight, minimum      2.5
          (v) Total Chloride as Cl per cent by weight, maximum                  8.0-9.0
          (vi) pH (1% soluble) at 200C

9. Potassium Thiosulphate (K2S2O3)

          (i) Water soluble Potassium (as K2O) per cent by 25.0
                  weight, minimum

(ii) Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum  17.0

(iii) Density (as 250C)                          1.45-1.49

(iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum    0.001

(v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum 0.001

(vi) Appearance                                  Clear, Colorless liquid solution

10. Calcium Thiosulphate (CaS2O3)

          (i) Total Calcium (as Ca) per cent by weight, 6.0
                  minimum

(ii) Sulphur (as S) per cent by weight, minimum 10.0

(iii) Density (as 250C)                          1.22-1.26

(iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum    0.001

(v) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum 0.001

(vi) Appearance                                  Clear, Colourless liquid solution

11. FORTIFIED NP (7:21:0) Liquid                                                7.0
          (i) Total Nitrogen (as N) per cent by weight, minimum                 21.0
          (ii) Water soluble Phosphorous (as P2O5) per cent by weight, minimum  0.20
          (iii) Zinc (as Zn) percent by weight                                  1.29-1.33
          (iv) Specific gravity                                                 8.5-10.0
          (v) pH

                         113
12. Fortified Calcium Suspension                             21.0
                                                             0.10
          (i) Calcium (as Ca) per cent by weight, minimum    1.50
          (ii) Boron (as B) per cent by weight, minimum      1.74-1.76
          (iii) Zinc (as Zn) percent by weight               8.5-10.0
          (iv) Specific gravity
          (v) pH                                            12.0
13. Zinc Gluconate                                          5.5-6.5
                                                            1.28-1.45
          (i) Zinc (as Zn) per cent by weight, minimum      0.003
          (ii) pH (1% solution)                             0.0025
          (iii) Specific gravity                            0.10
          (iv) Lead (as Pb) per cent by weight, maximum
          (v) Cadmium (as Cd) per cent by weight, maximum
          (vi) Arsenic (as As) per cent by weight, maximum

114
